Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD) is a long-termlungcondition that makes it hard for you tobreathe. COPDis an umbrella term used when you have one or more of these conditions: Emphysema.This results from damage to your lungs’ air sacs (alveoli) that destroys the walls inside them and causes them to merge into one giant air sac. It can’t absorb oxygen as well, so you get less oxygen in yourblood. Damaged alveoli can make your lungs stretch out and lose their springiness. Air gets trapped in your lungs and you can’t breathe it out, so you feel short of breath. Chronic bronchitis.If you havecoughing, shortness of breath, andmucusthat lingers at least 3 months for 2 years in a row, you have chronic bronchitis. Hair-like fibers called cilia line your bronchial tubes and help move mucus out. When you have chronic bronchitis, you lose your cilia. This makes it harder to get rid of mucus, which makes you cough more, which creates more mucus. Refractoryasthma.This type may also be called nonreversible. It doesn’t respond to normalasthma medications. Long-term exposure to things that irritate your lungs is the most common cause. In the U.S., that’s cigarette, pipe, or other types oftobaccosmoke. If you hang around other smokers and breathe in a lot ofsecondhand smoke, that can play a role, too. Your odds also go up if you smoke and haveasthma. If you smoke and haveCOPD, it tends to get worse faster. You might also develop this condition if you’ve been exposed to things like dust, air pollution, or certain chemicals for long periods of time. Your age can make COPD more likely. It develops slowly over the years, so most people are at least 40 when symptoms begin. It’s rare, but your genes could put you at risk for COPD. If you lack a protein called alpha 1 antitrypsin (AAT), you may be more likely to get it. At first, you might not have any symptoms. But as the disease gets worse, you might notice these common signs of COPD: Your doctor will ask about your symptoms, your medical history, and whether you smoke or have been exposed to chemicals, dust, or smoke at work. They’ll also do aphysical examand breathing tests. Let them know if you have an ongoing cough. The most common test is calledspirometry. You’ll breathe into a large, flexible tube that’s connected to a machine called a spirometer. It’ll measure how much air your lungs can hold and how fast you can blow air out of them. Your doctor may order other tests to rule out otherlung problems, such as asthma orheart failure. These might include: There’s no cure, so the goal of treatment is to ease your symptoms and slow the disease. Your doctor will also want to prevent or treat any complications and improve your overall quality of life. One of the best things you can do to stop your COPD from getting worse is tostop smoking. Talk to your doctor about different things you can try. Medical treatment Your plan may include: Surgery In severe cases of COPD, your doctor may suggest: COPD can cause many other health problems, like: Though there’s no cure, there are things you can do to stay healthy and ease your symptoms. Try taking these steps to enhance your quality of life: There may be times when your symptoms get worse for days or weeks. You might notice you’re coughing more with more mucus, or you have moretrouble breathing.Your doctor will call this an acuteexacerbation. If you don’t treat it, it could lead to lung failure. Medications, like antibiotics or steroids, can help, and so can oxygen treatments. You might need to go to the hospital. When you’re better, your doctor will tell you how to prevent flares: You can improve life with COPD by taking part in the management of your condition. One way to help your doctor is to monitor your COPD symptoms,diet, and exercisedaily. Keeping a daily written log may help you recognize aCOPD exacerbationwhen it begins. With a log, you’re more likely to notice whenCOPD symptomssuddenly get worse. This may allow you to seek medical treatment early, when it’s most effective, and might keep you from having to go to the hospital. It is also important to follow a healthy, balanced diet to prevent beingoverweight, which can make shortness of breath worse, or underweight, which is linked to a poorer outcome. Your doctor or a nutritionist can suggest healthy food choices for you. Use your log to track these things each day: Get medical help right away if any of these things happen: SOURCES: American Lung Association: "Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Fact Sheet." National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: "COPD," "COPD: Learn More, Breathe Better." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)." Journal of the American Medical Association: "Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease." American Association for Respiratory Care: "Eating Right: Tips for the COPD Patient." American Thoracic Society: "Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease." COPD Foundation: “What is COPD?” Mayo Clinic: “COPD.” American Family Physician: “Roflumilast (Daliresp) for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.” Umur S. Hatipoglu, MD, pulmonologist, Cleveland Clinic. Jason Turowski, MD, pulmonologist, Cleveland Clinic. Cleveland Clinic: “Lung Volume Reduction Surgery (LVRS).” Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD): “Pocket Guide to COPD Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention. A Guide for Health Care Professionals, 2019 Report.” Neil Schachter, MD, professor of pulmonary medicine, medical director of respiratory care department, Mount Sinai Center, New York City. GOLD: Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disorder. Check your COPD risk. What is the top cause of this condition? 7 early warning signs. 10 exercises for people With COPD. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.