Abnormal uterine bleeding is when you bleed outside of your normal monthly period. You might hear it called anovulatory bleeding. Your flow could also be heavier or last longer than what’s typical. When it comes to menstrual cycles, there’s a wide range of “normal.” But your period shouldn’t be a problem for you month after month. If it’s so heavy or unpredictable that it keeps you from doing some activities or makes you miss work or school, you may have a medical condition that should be treated. The signs of abnormal uterine bleeding include: Doctors check these things when diagnosingabnormal uterine bleeding: If you could bepregnantor you’re past menopause and have any kind of bleeding, call your doctor. Some spotting is common early in pregnancy, but bleeding can be a sign of a serious condition called anectopic pregnancy. That’s when a fertilized egg implants somewhere outside your uterus, most commonly in a fallopian tube. It could also mean you’re having amiscarriage. After menopause, women who takehormone replacement therapymay still have periods. But any bleeding should be checked out. There are a few possible causes behind abnormal uterine bleeding: Hormone changes.Problems with your hormones are the most common reason for abnormal uterine bleeding. When one of yourovariesreleases an egg (calledovulation), certain hormones tell your body to build up and then shed the lining of your uterus (called theendometrium). With teenagers and women getting close to menopause, the endometrium can build up too much. That can lead to an irregular orheavy periodor spotting between periods. These things can throw off your hormones, too: Problems with your uterus.Another possible reason forabnormal bleedingis a physical problem with your uterus. Millions of women havefibroids-- noncancerous tumors that grow in the muscles of the wall of the uterus. A polyp is another kind of growth that can form in the lining of your uterus. A condition called adenomyosis is where the cells similar to the ones that grow in the lining of the uterus start to grow in the muscle part of the uterus. Endometriosis can also cause abnormal bleeding. This is when tissue like the kind that lines the inside of your uterus grows outside of your uterus. Other health conditions.These are much less common, but abnormal uterine bleeding also can result from: It can help to take detailed notes over a few cycles so you can give the doctor specific information about your symptoms. They’ll also ask about your overall health and give you aphysical exam. You’ll probably get apregnancy test, and you may also have: Your treatment will depend on the cause of the abnormal uterine bleeding -- if a chronic illness or a blood disorder is at the root of your symptoms, treating that can help. Treatment also can depend on whether you plan to have children. It might not be safe toget pregnantafter some treatments, while others can make it impossible. If you’re close to menopause, the doctor may want to take a wait-and-see approach because your symptoms may get better on their own. Drugsare usually the first thing your doctor will try. They include: Sometimes surgery can be needed to stop the bleeding: Complications that may happen with abnormal uterine bleeding include: SOURCES: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Abnormal Uterine Bleeding.” American Society for Reproductive Medicine: “Abnormal Uterine Bleeding.” CDC: “Heavy Menstrual Bleeding.” UpToDate: “Patient education: Abnormal uterine bleeding (Beyond the Basics.)” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Abnormal Uterine Bleeding.” National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: “Uterine Fibroids: Condition Information.” Cleveland Clinic: “Uterine Bleeding: Abnormal Uterine Bleeding.” American Family Physician: “Abnormal Uterine Bleeding,” ”Abnormal Uterine Bleeding in Premenopausal Women.” Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences: “The effect of oral progesterone for the treatment of abnormal uterine bleeding in women taking warfarin following prosthetic valve replacement.” Mayo Clinic: “Endometriosis,” “Menorrhagia (heavy menstrual bleeding),” “Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).” Baylor Medicine: “Abnormal Menstrual Bleeding.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.