An abscess is a pocket of pus that forms around the root of an infectedtooth. Anyone, from children to the elderly, can get one. If you have one, it won’t get better on its own. You need treatment from a dentist orendodontist-- a specialist who can help save your tooth. If you don’t treat it, the infection can spread beyond your jaw to your neck, head, or other body parts. Your tooth is hard on the outside, but the inside is filled with a pulp made up of nerves, connective tissue, andbloodvessels. Sometimes it gets infected. Most often that results from: If you don’t treat the infection, it can kill the pulp and lead to an abscess. There are two common types: You can get more than one abscess. Or one abscess can travel through the bone and show up in several spots. But each is related to only one tooth. You’re more likely to have these kinds of issues if you don’t brush your teeth at least twice a day or if there’s a lot of sugar in your diet. Sugary foods and drinks help bacteria grow, and that can lead tocavitiesand other problems. In some cases, the area around thetoothhurts, but not always. If it does, it’s usually a sharp, throbbing pain, especially when you put pressure on your tooth. It might also spread to your jaw or other parts of your face on the side that’s affected. You might also notice: Sometimes an abscess causes a pimple-like bump on your gum. If you press it and liquid oozes out, it’s a sure bet you have anabscessed tooth. That liquid is pus. If you have swelling in your face and a fever, or you havetrouble breathingor swallowing, go to the emergency room. The infection may have spread to other parts of your body. Anabscessed toothwon’t go away on its own. See your dentist right away if you have signs of one. It’s important to treat it because there’s a chance it could spread to your jaw or other parts of your head or neck. This is especially true if yourimmune systemis weak because of a health condition, likeHIVor AIDS. Certainmedications, including somecancertreatments, can also make it harder for your body to fight infections. To find out if you have an abscessed tooth, your dentist probably will: If your dentist can’t diagnose the abscess on their own, they’ll probably send you to an endodontist, who’s specially trained to work on abscessedteeth. They can tell for sure if you have an abscess and treat it if you do. The goal is to get rid of the infection. To do that, the endodontist may try: Antibiotics.If the infection has spread past the abscess site to your jaw or farther into your body, you’ll probably get them. However, they won’t cure the abscess. Extraction.If the endodontist can’t save the tooth, it will have to come out. Root canal.You may have heard about this common way to treat an abscess. It’s the best way to save your tooth. The endodontist drills into your tooth and cleans the pulp from inside it and the root canals that go down into your gum. They fill and seal the empty spaces. You’ll either get a filling or acrown. The restored tooth will look and work just like your other teeth. Surgery.You may need it to drain a periodontal abscess. Keep in mind, if an abscess ruptures, your pain will ease but you'll still need treatment from a dentist or endodontist. Take these simple steps to keep your teeth and gums healthy: SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: “Guideline on Use of Antibiotic Therapy for Pediatric Dental Procedures.” Mayo Clinic: “Tooth abscess: Diagnosis & treatment,” “Tooth abscess: Symptoms & causes.” American Association of Endodontists: “Abscessed Teeth.” Edmond Hewlett, DDS, professor, associate dean for outreach and diversity, UCLA. Journal of Clinical and Diagnostic Research: “Periodontal Abscess: A Review.” Rico Short, DMD, Apex Endodontics, Smyrna, GA. American Dental Association: “Abscess (Toothache).” Journal of the Canadian Dental Association: “How Do I Manage a Patient with Periodontal Abscess?” NHS Choices: “Dental Abscess.” Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.