Amenorrhea is when you aren’t getting your periods even though you’ve been throughpuberty, aren’tpregnant, and haven’t gone through menopause. It’s not about havingirregular periods. If you have amenorrhea, you never get your period. Although it’s not a disease, you should tell your doctor about it because it might be a symptom of a medical condition that can be treated. There are two types of amenorrhea: Primary amenorrhea.This is when young women have not had theirfirst periodby the age of 15. Secondary amenorrhea.This is when you have had normal menstrual cycles, but they stop for 3 or more months. Besides not having your period, there are some other symptoms you may have, depending on the cause of your amenorrhea: Many things could cause amenorrhea. Possible causes of primary amenorrhea (when you never get yourfirst period) include: In many cases, doctors don’t know why a first period never happens. Common causes of secondary amenorrhea (when someone who has had normal periods stops getting them) include: Other causes of secondary amenorrhea include: If you've had your uterus or ovaries removed, you will also stop menstruating. Because many things can cause amenorrhea, it may take time to find the exact cause. Your doctor will first take your medical history and give you a physical andpelvic exam. If you’re sexually active, they might first order apregnancy testto rule out pregnancy as a cause. It may take several kinds of tests to find out what’s causing your amenorrhea. Your doctor may use one or more of the following: Bloodtests.These measure the levels of certain hormones in your blood, including follicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH), thyroid-stimulating hormone,prolactin, and male hormones. Too much or too little of these hormones can interfere with the menstrual cycle. Imaging tests.These tests can show abnormalities of your reproductive organs or the location of tumors. The tests includeultrasound, computerized tomography (CT), andmagnetic resonance imaging(MRI). Hormone challenge test.Your doctor will give you a hormonal medication that should cause menstrual bleeding when you stop taking it. If you don’t, this can mean that a lack ofestrogenis behind your amenorrhea. Hysteroscopy.Your doctor will put a small lighted camera through yourvaginaandcervixto look at the inside of your uterus. Genetic screening.Looks for genetic changes that can stop your ovaries from working, and for Xchromosomesthat are partly or completely missing (Turner’s syndrome). Chromosome tests (karyotype).Identifies missing, extra, or rearranged cells in your chromosomes to help pinpoint abnormalities that can cause amenorrhea. Treatment for amenorrhea will focus on the condition that causes it.Hormone replacement therapyorbirth control pillscan help start your menstrual cycle again. A thyroid or pituitary disorder can be treated with medication. Physical abnormalities may need surgery. If something such asstress, weight gain or loss, ordepressionis affecting your menstrual cycle, you can take an active role in your treatment by taking steps to manage it. Friends, family, or your doctor may be able to help you. You can help your doctor trace the cause of your amenorrhea by tracking changes in your cycle and symptoms and sharing this information with them. Tell them what medications you’re taking, and about changes in your diet,exercisehabits, and stress levels. SOURCES: Hormone Health Network: "Amenorrhea." National Institute of Child Health & Human Development: "Amenorrhea." Mayo Clinic: “Amenorrhea.” Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: “Amenorrhea.” Cleveland Clinic: “Amenorrhea.” Fertility and Sterility:“Menses resumption after cancer treatment-induced amenorrhea occurs early or not at all.” Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: “Amenorrhea.” Yale Medicine: “Amenorrhea.” What to know about IVF and when the treatment is an option. Learn about common problems in men and women. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.