Acanthosis nigricansis askindisorder that results in velvety, light-brown-to-black markings that occur in areas including the neck, armpits, groin, and under thebreasts. Acanthosis nigricans can affect otherwise healthy people, or it can be associated with certain medical conditions. Sometimes acanthosis nigricans is congenital (something a person is born with). It also can occur as a result of obesity or anendocrine(glandular) disorder. It is frequently found in obese people with diabetes or a tendency towardsdiabetesand is most common among people of African descent. There are many other possible causes of acanthosis nigricans, including:  Most people with acanthosis nigricans have aninsulinlevel that is higher than that of people of the same weight who don't have acanthosis nigricans. Eating too much of the wrong foods, especially starches and sugars, can raiseinsulinlevels. Rarely, people with certain types ofcancercan also develop acanthosis nigricans. The condition can be diagnosed by a doctor through a medical history andphysical exam. Eating a special diet can help reduce circulatinginsulinand may lead to some improvement of the acanthosis nigricans. Other treatments to improve skin appearance include Retin-A, 20% urea, alpha hydroxyacids, topicalvitamin D, andsalicylic acidprescriptions. These are only minimally effective, however. Acanthosis nigricans caused by a drug may go away once the medication is stopped. When acanthosis nigricans is related toobesity, weight management is an important part of prevention. A diet that contributes to reduced insulin also can help prevent acanthosis nigricans. Other preventive strategies include treating medical problems that are linked to acanthosis nigricans (such ashypothyroidism) and avoiding medications that tend to cause or worsen the condition (likebirth control pills).  Photo Credit: Richard Usatine, MD SOURCE: American Academy of Dermatology. American Diabetes Association. American Academy of Dermatology  Association – Photo Caption DermNet NZ – Photo Caption  Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.