Anacoustic neuromais a noncancerous growth that develops on the eighth cranial nerve. Also known as the vestibulocochlear nerve, it connects the inner ear with thebrainand has two different parts. One part is involved in transmitting sound; the other helps send balance information from the inner ear to thebrain. Acoustic neuromas -- sometimes called vestibular schwannomas or neurilemmoma -- usually grow slowly over a period of years. Although they do not actually invade thebrain, they can push on it as they grow. Larger tumors can press on nearby cranial nerves that control the muscles of facial expression and sensation. If tumors become large enough to press on thebrainstem or cerebellum, they can be deadly. The early symptoms of an acoustic neuroma are often subtle. Many people attribute the symptoms to normal changes of aging, so it may be a while before the condition is diagnosed. The first symptom is usually a gradual loss of hearing in one ear, often accompanied byringing in the ear(tinnitus) or a feeling of fullness in the ear. Less commonly, acoustic neuromas may cause suddenhearing loss. Other symptoms, which may occur over time, include: It's important to see your doctor if you experience these symptoms. Symptoms like clumsiness and mental confusion can signal a serious problem that requires urgent treatment. There are two types of acoustic neuroma: a sporadic form and a form associated with a syndrome calledneurofibromatosistype II (NF2). NF2 is an inherited disorder characterized by the growth of noncancerous tumors in the nervous system. Acoustic neuromas are the most common of these tumors and often occur in both ears by age 30. NF2 is a rare disorder. It accounts for only 5% of acoustic neuromas. This means the vast majority are the sporadic form. Doctors aren't certain what causes the sporadic form. One known risk factor for acoustic neuroma is exposure to high doses ofradiation, especially to the head and neck. There are three main courses of treatment for acoustic neuroma: Observationis also called watchful waiting. Because acoustic neuromas are not cancerous and grow slowly, immediate treatment may not be necessary. Often doctors monitor the tumor with periodic MRI scans and will suggest other treatment if the tumor grows a lot or causes serious symptoms. Surgeryfor acoustic neuromas may involve removing all or part of the tumor. There are three main surgical approaches for removing an acoustic neuroma: Radiation therapyis recommended in some cases for acoustic neuromas. State-of-the-art delivery techniques make it possible to send high doses of radiation to the tumor while limiting expose and damage to surrounding tissue. Radiation therapy for this condition is usually delivered in one of two ways: Both of these are outpatient procedures, which means they don't require a hospital stay. They work by causing tumor cells to die. The tumor's growth may slow or stop or it may even shrink, but radiation doesn't completely remove the tumor. Other types of radiation therapy have also been used. Your doctor will explain your options to you. Selecting the right treatment depends on a number of factors, including:   SOURCES:UCLA Health System: "Acoustic Neuroma Brain Tumor."Acoustic Neuroma Foundation: "What Is Acoustic Neuroma?"Acoustic Neuroma Association: "Symptoms of Acoustic Neuroma."American Hearing Research Foundation: "Acoustic Neuroma."Genetics Home Reference: "Neurofibromatosis type 2."Acoustic Neuroma Association: "Treatment Options." Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.