Most people do not want to think about death and dying -- so they don't. Until they have to. Unfortunately, that often means that families are left struggling with difficult decisions about important matters, such as whether or not Mom would like to be kept alive using a ventilator, or who should be in charge of managing Dad's financial affairs, because Mom or Dad never made clear what they wanted for themselves. Advance directives are important tools for anyone to have, because even the healthiest person could experience a sudden accident and not be able to speak for herself. But when you have a life-threatening illness, it's particularly critical to make clear, in writing, what your wishes are should the time come when you can't express them yourself. There are two primary kinds of advance directives: A power of attorney may be more flexible, since it's impossible to predict all the medical decisions that might come up in the future and spell out your exact preferences for all of these situations. Many states actually combine the living will and power of attorney into one "advance directive" form. You should only assign someone power of attorney to make your medical decisions if you have someone you trust to carry out your wishes. For example, your husband or daughter might find it painful to comply with your preference not to have a breathing tube inserted. When you do choose a medical power of attorney, you will probably want to put some specific things in writing as to the kind of care you would want should you not be able to express your wishes directly. Some things to think about: Each state has its own form for advance directives, giving you questions to answer and specific things that you can choose to accept or reject, but you can always add additional information about your wishes if the form does not include everything you're concerned about. If you decide to choose a medical power of attorney, here are some things to look for: You might also want to think about an alternate power of attorney if your first choice is unable to carry out the job. Once you choose a medical power of attorney, continue talking with them on an ongoing basis about possible situations that might occur, and how you would want them handled. Although you cannot anticipate every possibility, the more you talk with this person about your wishes in general, the better they will understand your overall desires about care at the end of your life. Here are some possibilities you may want to discuss: Whether you write a living will, choose a medical power of attorney, or both, you will need to make those decisions legally binding, in writing. There are state-specific forms for advance directives like these; you do not need an attorney to prepare them. You can download the forms you need. Each state's form is different, so be sure to use the correct form for your state. You will generally need to have your form witnessed and/or notarized, so take careful note of the requirements for your state. Once you have completed your advance directive, you should ensure that everyone involved in your care has a copy and is aware of it: your doctor, your hospital, yourhospiceor palliative care team, important family members, and your attorney if you have one. SOURCES: Center to Advance Palliative Care, New York. Caring Connections, a project of the National Hospice and Palliative Care Association, Alexandria, Va. Aging With Dignity, Tallahassee. Here's how to avoid it. Non-drug options that can help. What to expect when your loved one is dying. Understanding the difference. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.