The wonderful bond you create with your baby when you breastfeed is like no other. And experts agree that breast milk is ideal for your infant. But even though you want to give your baby the best start you can, you can't help but be concerned. What will nursing do to yourbreasts? Think of their size and shape, for example. Throughout your life -- and especially during pregnancy andbreastfeeding-- the size and shape of yourbreastscan change. Breast size is determined by how much fatty tissue there is. Making milk creates denser tissue in your breasts. Afterbreastfeeding, both the fatty tissue and connective tissue in your breasts may shift. Your breasts may or may not return to their pre-breastfeedingsize or shape. Some women's breasts stay large, and others shrink. But sagging or staying full can be as much a result of genetics,weight gain during pregnancy, and age as a result of breastfeeding. When you're nursing, the flow of milk can stretch your breastskinand tissue. That leaves some women with an "empty" or "stretched out" look to their breasts when the milk-producing structures shrink to the size they were before you got pregnant. It's a common cosmetic breast problem after breastfeeding, but it isn't a medical concern. Women often fear that breastfeeding will make their breasts sag. But other factors can change your breast appearance more than breastfeeding. These include: Each breast is independent. So what happens to one breast during breastfeeding won't necessarily happen to the other. Breast engorgement, or painful overfilling of the breasts with milk is a common condition that may leave one breast slightly misshapen afterward, for instance. Or one breast may produce more milk than the other, contributing to asymmetry of the breasts. Any dimpling or puckering of your breast may be a sign of a breast lump underneath and should be checked by your doctor. Breast tissue extends up toward yourarmpit. So, as breast tissue swells with milk and then shrinks again after breastfeeding, the contours of your bust line may change. Many women have uneven breasts before becoming pregnant as well as after breastfeeding. It's possible for one breast to return to its pre-pregnancy size while the other stays larger, droops, or flattens more. Some women end up with one breast a full cup size smaller or larger than the other after breastfeeding and simply learn to love the body that nourished their babies -- no matter what its shape. Most breast problems after breastfeeding are cosmetic changes, not real medical concerns. But it's wise to stay up to date on your regular breast screening tests to ensure your breast health. Call your doctor if you have any of these breast problems: A positive note: Breastfeeding lowers your risk ofbreast cancer. Women who have never breastfed have a slightly higher risk. When breast size or shape changes a lot after breastfeeding, some women considercosmetic surgery. A breast lift, called a mastopexy, can be performed to help sagging and to reposition the nipple and areola (the dark circle around the nipple) higher on the breast. A thorough evaluation by a qualified cosmetic surgeon, including a complete breast health history, is advised before you consider surgery. SOURCES: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: "Detecting and Treating Breast Problems." American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: "Breastfeeding Your Baby." Martin, C.The Nursing Mother's Problem Solver,Fireside Books, 2002. National Library of Medicine: "Breast Feeding." National Library of Medicine: "Overcoming Breastfeeding Problems." National Library of Medicine: "Cosmetic Breast Surgery." La Leche League International: "Can breastfeeding mothers get mammograms?" News release, American Society of Plastic Surgeons: "Breastfeeding Does Not Create Sagging Breasts; Study Throws Out Old Wives Tale" (October 28, 2007). The National Women's Health Information Center: "Questions and Answers about Breastfeeding."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.