Agoraphobia is a rare type of anxiety disorder. If you have it, your fears keep you from getting out into the world. You avoid certain places and situations because you think you’ll feel trapped and not be able to get help. For example, you might worry or panic when you are in: You may be willing to go just a handful of places, or you may even dread leaving your house. Doctors aren't sure what causes agoraphobia. They think it runs in families. You may haveit if you have a lot ofpanic attacks. That's when you have bursts of fear that come out of the blue and last for a few minutes. These happen when there's no real danger. Less than 1% of people in the U.S. have agoraphobia. Women are two to three times more likely to have it than men, and it's more common in teenagers and young adults. A few other things that can raise your chances of it include having: If you have agoraphobia and end up in a place that scares you, you can become very anxious or panic. Physical symptoms of this can include: You may feel like: You also might have: A lot of the symptoms caused by agoraphobia are the same as those of other medical conditions likeheart disease,stomachissues, andbreathing problems. So you may make several trips to the doctor or emergency room before you and your doctor figure out what's really going on. Your doctor may ask: They’ll do aphysical examand maybe some tests to rule out any other medical problems. If they don’t find a physical reason for your symptoms, they’ll probably recommend that you see a psychiatrist or therapist. At your session, you’ll answer questions about your feelings and your behavior. According to standards created by the American Psychiatric Association, you could be diagnosed with agoraphobia if you feel extreme fear or panic in at least two of these situations: Your doctor will usually treat agoraphobia withtherapy, medication, or a combination of the two. Therapy. Cognitive therapy can teach you new ways to think about or face situations that cause panic and help you be less afraid. You may also learn relaxation and breathing exercises. Sometimes your therapist may suggest exposure therapy, in which you gradually start to do some of the things that make you anxious. Medicine. There are many drugs that your doctor might suggest for agoraphobia, but the most common areantidepressants. Doctors often start with a low dose of one of these medicines that raises the level of a "feel-good" chemical in yourbraincalled serotonin. Somemedicationsthat help balance serotonin arecitalopram(Celexa),escitalopram oxalate(Lexapro),fluoxetine(Prozac),sertraline(Zoloft), andvenlafaxine(Effexor). You'll probably take medicine for at least 6 months to a year. If you feel better and no longer are stressed when you're in places that used to scare you, your doctor may begin tapering off your medicine. For short-term relief, your doctor may recommend anti-anxiety medications, called benzodiazepines, in addition to antidepressants. These are sedatives that can help with your symptoms. You can start to depend on them, so you shouldn’t take them for long. And be sure to tell your doctor if you’ve had any issues with alcohol or drug abuse. Alternative therapies.Applied relaxation is a series of exercises that help you notice when you start to feel tense and learn how to relax your muscles and ease that tension. It typically takes an hour-long session each week for 12 to 15 weeks. Other alternative therapies that may help include breathing exercises and meditation. Lifestyle changes.It can help to exerciseregularly and eat a healthy diet. Skipcaffeineandalcohol. They can make your symptoms worse. The right combination of medication and therapy can help manage agoraphobia and make living with it easier. A few other things to keep in mind: SOURCES: Anxiety and Depression Association of America: "Panic Disorder & Agoraphobia." Medscape: "Phobic Disorders." National Institute of Mental Health: "Panic Disorder." NHS: "Agoraphobia." Cleveland Clinic: “Agoraphobia: Diagnosis and Tests.” Victoria State Government: “Agoraphobia.” Mayo Clinic: “Agoraphobia.” Mount Sinai Health System: “Agoraphobia.” 14 non-drug remedies that can release tension. Test your knowledge. What are your fears? Do you know how stress affects your health? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.