Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a common virus. Over half of adults in the U.S. have it in their body by age 40. CMV spreads easily through an infected person’ssalivaor other body fluids. It’s related to theherpesvirus, which gives youcold sores. If you have ahealthy immune systemthat can easily control the virus, it usually doesn't cause problems. But it can make people who have weakened immune systems sick. In people who have advancedHIV, CMV can cause aneyeinfection calledretinitisthat may lead to blindness. CMV retinitis is what’s known as an AIDS-defining condition. The virus could also affect yourintestines,esophagus,lungs,brain, or nerves. There are different types of cytomegalovirus infection. General symptoms of primary CMV Most healthy people who get CMV don't know it. If you have symptoms of primary CMV, they're mild and include: Less common symptoms of primary CMV In rare cases, CMV can also cause: Symptoms of congenital CMV Babies born with CMV might have: Symptoms of CMV with HIV If you also have advanced HIV, CMV can affect different parts of your body. You could have: If you have HIV, you probably won’t get sick with CMV unless your CD4 count, a type of whitebloodcell, is below 100. You probably won't catch CMV from casual contact. But you can get it by touching youreyes, nose, ormouthafter having contact with an infected person's: You can also get cytomegalovirus through: CMV spreads easily in places with lots of young children, like day-care centers, so anyone who spends time there is at higher risk of getting it. You’re also more likely to get the virus if your immune system is weakened because of amedicationor another health condition. Your doctor will order tests such as: When you have retinitis because of CMV, your doctor may give you strong medications intravenously (through a vein) for a couple of weeks, a process called induction therapy. After a while, they may switch you to pills. You might have medication injected into youreyeif yourvisionis in danger. Your doctor might prescribe drugs including: These drugs generally can't cure the disease if you have advanced HIV, but they can control it while you get antiretroviral therapy (ART) for your HIV infection. Depending on the medicine, you could have side effects including: Most important, if you take ART early in an HIV infection, the drugs will keep it from getting worse and will keep you from getting CMV in the first place. It’s rare, but CMV can cause complications including: In people with HIV, complications include: Complications in babies born with CMV include: There’s no cure for CMV. The virus stays inactive in your body and can cause more problems later. This reactivation is most common in people who’ve had stem cell and organ transplants. Your outlook depends on your overall health. In people who have strong immune systems, CMV symptoms almost always go away on their own. Congenital CMV can have lifelong effects. The risks are highest when the mother has their first CMV infection during a pregnancy. If you have a weakened immune system, you might need treatment for the rest of your life to prevent complications. CMV was once the most common viral opportunistic infection -- illnesses that are worse or happen more often in people with weakened immune systems -- tied to HIV. Now, ART can help keep your CD4 count up and your immune system strong. It can also help stop retinitis from coming back. If you have advanced HIV, your doctor might also give you medicine to prevent CMV, in addition to your ART. But it's expensive, sometimes causes severe side effects, and may not work well. The most important thing is to take your ART medications daily as prescribed. Talk to your doctor about your chance of getting CMV if you're having ablood transfusion. SOURCES: CDC: "Frequently Asked Questions about CMV," "About CMV," "You Can Prevent CMV." AIDS Treatment Data Network: "Cytomegalovirus." eMedicine: "Cytomegalovirus." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Cytomegalovirus." UCSF Center for HIV Information: "Cytomegalovirus and HIV." National Library of Medicine MedlinePlus Drugs & Supplements: "Valganciclovir." News release, FDA. National CMV Foundation: “CMV Transmission,” “Potential Outcomes of Congenital CMV.” Nemours/KidsHealth: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV).” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Infection.” American Association for Clinical Chemistry: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) Tests.” AIDS Info: “CD4 T Lymphocyte,” “What is an Opportunistic Infection?” Australian Department of Health: “Cytomegalovirus.” Infectious Diseases and Therapy: “Who Is the Patient at Risk of CMV Recurrence: A Review of the Current Scientific Evidence with a Focus on Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation.” Mayo Clinic: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection.” Harvard Health Publishing: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV).” U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV).” Cleveland Clinic: “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) in Transplant Patients.” National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Neurological Consequences of Cytomegalovirus Infection Information Page.”  How much do you know? What to do now. Should you be tested? What does it mean? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.