If you have HIV, treating it early with antiretroviral medicines will help your immune system and allow you to stay in good health. But untreated HIV, over the course of years, will harm your immune system and can lead to opportunistic infections. "Opportunistic" means they take advantage of the weaker immune system of someone with HIV. People with healthy immune systems aren't bothered by them. HIV attacks CD4 cells, which find and destroy bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other germs. Without enough CD4 cells to fight them off, infections can lead to illnesses, cancers, and brain and nerve problems. Certain opportunistic infections are signs that your HIV has become AIDS. If your CD4 count stays up, opportunistic infections are less likely to be a problem. This is why you must continue to take your HIV medicines. If your CD4 count is low, your doctor may want you to take preventive drugs to lessen your chances of getting sick. If you do get sick, you can take medicines to help your body fight some of these infections. Almost any disease can become an opportunistic infection when your immune system is weak. Some are more common than others, and depending on your CD4 count, some are more likely to occur. Men are three times more likely than women to develop a cancer called Kaposi's sarcoma. Women have a greater chance of getting certain infections like HPV that can lead to cancers of the reproductive system such as cervical cancer. The most important way to prevent opportunistic infections is to take your HIV medicines and keep your CD4 count from becoming low.  If you are starting with a low CD4 count (less than 200 cells per microliter of blood), you can take steps to lower your chances of getting these infections. You can get lab tests to find out which germs are already in your body. This will help your doctor know what medicines or vaccines you need in addition to your HIV drugs. If you have a low CD4 count, keep a record of your symptoms, and pay attention to: Call your doctor when you have new or unusual symptoms. Don't wait for your next scheduled visit. Because the HIV virus makes copies of itself more quickly when you have an opportunistic infection, early treatment is important. It will help you avoid the serious consequences of infection as well as preserve your immune system. Follow through with all of the treatment. Don't quit early. Your doctor might also prescribe medication to prevent the infection from coming back, and if your immune system recovers, you may be able to stop taking that. SOURCES: PDR: "HIV Opportunistic Infections." AIDS.gov: "Opportunistic Infections." TheWellProject: "What are Opportunistic Infections?" New Mexico AIDS Education & Training Center AIDS InfoNet: "Opportunistic Infections." Project Inform: "Opportunistic Infection Strategy." Test Positive Aware Network: "Opportunistic Infections 101." How much do you know? What to do now. Should you be tested? What does it mean? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.