Alcoholuse disorder is what doctors call it when you can’t control how much you drink and have trouble with your emotions when you’re not drinking. Some people may think the only way to deal with it is withwillpower, as if it’s a problem they have to work through all on their own. But alcohol use disorder is actually abrain disease. Alcohol causes changes in yourbrainthat make it hard to quit. Trying to tough it out on your own can be like trying to cureappendicitiswith cheerful thoughts. An important first step is to learn more aboutalcohol use disorderand your treatment options. Alcoholismis a common and different term foralcoholuse disorder. Milder cases -- when people abuse alcohol but aren’t dependent on it -- are as well. Your doctor or another health care provider can help with the diagnosis. They may say you have alcohol use disorder if you: When you meet with your doctor, talk about your goals. Are you trying to drink less or stop drinking completely? Together, you can start to make a treatment plan. You doctor also can refer you to a treatment center or experts who can help. The one that’s right for you depends on your situation and your goals. Many people find that a combination of treatments works best, and you can get them together through a program. Some of these are inpatient or residential programs, where you stay at a treatment center for a while. Others are outpatient programs, where you live at home and go to the center for treatment. This is a key step if your drinking problem is severe. Detox isn’t a treatment by itself. The goal is to stop drinking and give your body time to get the alcohol out of your system. That usually takes a few days to a week. Most people go to a hospital or treatment center because of withdrawal symptoms like: Doctors and other experts can keep an eye on you and give you medicine to help with your symptoms. You can go through detox in two main ways: Inpatient. This option may be best if you’ve been misusing alcohol heavily. You stay full time in a clinic, hospital, or a detox center. You’ll get around-the-clock help during your withdrawal. Outpatient. You visit with your doctor or health provider for treatment during the day. Outpatient rehab can be safe if your condition is mild or moderate. During or after your alcohol rehabilitation, seeing a therapist can help you learn new skills and strategies to help you stay sober for the long term. Psychologists, social workers, or alcohol counselors can teach you how to: Some people just need a short, focusedcounselingsession. Others may want one-on-onetherapyfor a longer time to deal with issues likeanxietyordepression. Alcohol use can have a big effect on the people close to you, so couples orfamily therapycan help, too. No medicine can “cure” alcohol use disorder, but some can help as you recover. They can make drinking less enjoyable so you don’t want to do it as much: Drugsused for other conditions -- likesmoking,pain, orepilepsy-- also may help with alcohol use disorder. Talk to your doctor to see of one of those might be right for you. Giving up and staying away from alcohol can take persistence and hard work. Healthy habits and strategies for getting through daily life can be important to your recovery. Steps you can take include: Grouptherapyor a support group can help during rehab and help you stay on track as life gets back to normal. Group therapy, led by a therapist, can give you the benefits of therapy along with the support of other members. Support groups aren’t led by therapists. Instead, these are groups of people who have alcohol use disorder. Examples includeAlcoholics Anonymous, SMART Recovery, and other programs. Your peers can offer understanding and advice and help keep you accountable. Many people stay in groups for years. Recovery can take a long time, so you may need ongoing treatment. And some people in recovery do relapse and drink again. If you do, don’t think you’ve failed. It’s often a stage in the process. SOURCES: National Institute on Drug Abuse: “Principles of Adolescent Substance Use Disorder Treatment: A Research-Based Guide.” National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism: “Alcohol Use Disorder: A Comparison Between DSM–IV and DSM–5,” “Treatment for Alcohol Problems: Finding and Getting Help,” “Alcohol Use Disorder.” National Institutes of HealthNIH News in Health: “Biology of Addiction.” Alcohol Rehab Guide: “Treating Alcoholism.” Mayo Clinic: “Alcohol Use Disorder,” “Support Groups: Make Connections, Get Help.” UpToDate: “Patient education: Alcohol use -- when is drinking a problem? (Beyond the Basics).” Harvard Health Publications: “Alcohol Withdrawal.” Recovery.org: “Aftercare Programs for People in Addiction Recovery.” American Psychological Association: “Psychotherapy: Understanding Group Therapy.” Medscape: “Alcoholism Treatment & Management.” Prescription and over-the-counter medications. Know when to seek medical attention. Changes that happen in the body and the mind. Causes, symptoms, and treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.