Alcohol poisoning is when there’s too much alcohol in your blood, and it causes parts of your brain to shut down. It’s also called alcohol overdose. Alcohol is a depressant. That means it can affect yourbrain and nervous system, slowing yourbreathing, your heart rate, and other important tasks that your body does. Yourliverusually does a good job of keeping alcohol's toxins from getting into your bloodstream. But if you drink a lot in a short time, your liver may not be able to keep up. Alcohol poisoning can lead to brain damage or death. If you’re with someone who might have drunk too much, call 911 right away.Learnhow to tell if someone has alcohol poisoning. Some symptoms start mild and grow worse. Signs of alcohol poisoning include: Some symptoms of alcohol poisoning are more serious. These include: In severe cases, alcohol poisoning can cause problems like: Alcoholic drinks contain a form of alcohol known as ethyl alcohol or ethanol. That’s what causes alcohol poisoning. Other kinds that you might have around the house, like isopropyl alcohol (rubbing alcohol) and methanol (wood alcohol), are toxic in a different way. Binge drinking is a major cause of alcohol poisoning. For a man, binge drinking is when you have five or more drinks in less than 2 hours. For a woman, it's four drinks in that same amount of time. "Extreme" binge drinking is double those amounts. One drink is:  Men and middle-age adults have the highest odds of getting alcohol poisoning. Men tend to drink more than women. And middle-age people are more likely than younger ones to takeprescription drugs, which can increase the severity of alcohol poisoning. Alcohol poisoning can also depend on things like:  If you think someone you're with has alcohol poisoning, take these steps: Don’t do these things. They may do more harm than good: Your doctor can diagnose alcohol poisoning based on your symptoms. They’ll also order blood and urine tests to check your alcohol levels.  If you’ve drunk dangerous amounts of alcohol, doctors may "pump" yourstomach. This keeps any leftover alcohol from getting into your bloodstream. At the hospital, they may also: If you’re going to drink alcohol, keep these tips in mind to avoid alcohol poisoning: SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: "Alcohol Poisoning," "Alcohol Poisoning Prevention," "Alcohol Poisoning: Management and Treatment." Mayo Clinic. "Alcohol poisoning," "Alcohol use disorder." National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism: "Understanding the Dangers of Alcohol Overdose." Pennsylvania Department of Drug and Alcohol Programs: “Alcohol poisoning or overdose.” University of Washington: “Alcohol Poisoning.” Prescription and over-the-counter medications. Know when to seek medical attention. Changes that happen in the body and the mind. Causes, symptoms, and treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.