You need your medicine to manage your health. They can make a huge difference in your life. But sometimes, people have anallergic reactionto a medicine. When you have an allergy, your immune system mistakenly sees something that’s harmless as an invader. Your body responds with certain chemicals, such as large amounts ofhistamine, to try to get rid of it. If you think you have adrug allergy, tell your doctor. There may be another treatment you could try instead. Even in people who aren't allergic, many drugs can cause issues like anupset stomach. But during anallergic reaction, the release ofhistaminecan cause symptoms like: A more severe reaction, calledanaphylaxis, may include: Anaphylaxis is a life-threatening emergency and can lead to shock and loss of consciousness. Symptoms of a drug allergy may start right after you take it. But some take hours, days, or weeks to appear. Some people have a reaction the first time they take a drug, and others might take the drug several times before a reaction happens. And you can develop an allergy to something at any time -- even a drug you’ve taken safely for years. Most of the time, a bad reaction to a drug doesn’t mean you have an allergy. Side effects are common, especially as your body gets used to a new medication. If it’s a side effect, rather than an allergy, you’re more likely to have: Anybody can be allergic to any drug. That includes prescriptionmedicationsand ones you can get over the counter.Penicillinand other similarantibioticsare the drugs most people are allergic to. Other meds commonly found to cause allergic reactions include: Your doctor will talk to you about your medical history and symptoms. They’ll want to know what you took, whether you’ve ever had a drug reaction or other allergies, and whether you have other medical conditions. Take note of how quickly your symptoms appeared, whether they’ve changed, and whether anything has helped. If they think you might be allergic to an antibiotic, such aspenicillin, they may give you askintest to confirm it. If you’ve had a seriousskinreaction, your doctor may run blood tests to check how your organs are working and to see if there are any other signs of anallergic reaction. Butskin testingdoesn’t work for all drugs, and in some cases it could be dangerous. If you've had a severe, life-threatening reaction to a particular drug, your doctor will simply rule out that medicine as a treatment option for you. Getting anallergy testto find out if the severe reaction was a "true" allergic response isn't needed if there are other drug options. The first goal is to ease your symptoms. For instance, medicines such asantihistamines, and in some cases, corticosteroids, can often controlrash,hives, anditching. Forcoughingandlungcongestion, your doctor may prescribe drugs calledbronchodilatorsto widen your airways. Foranaphylaxissymptoms, you may need a shot ofepinephrine, and you definitely need emergency medical care, even if those symptoms stop after you takeepinephrine. Sometimes, doctors use a process called desensitization to treat anallergyto penicillin or other drugs. Over time, you’ll get shots of tiny amounts of penicillin, with increasingly larger amounts until your immune system can handle the drug. You'll probably only get this procedure if there aren't any other medicines that can treat your condition. If you're severely allergic to certainantibiotics, there should be alternatives that your doctor can prescribe. If you know you have a drug allergy, memorize the name of that drug, both brand names and generic name. Tell all yourhealth careproviders before you get any type of treatment, includingdental care. It’s also a good idea to carry a card or wear a special bracelet or pendant that identifies yourallergy, in case of emergency. Know what to do if you have anallergic reaction. If your doctor prescribesmedicationfor emergencies, like anEpiPen, make sure you always carry two and you know how to use it. SOURCES: FDA: "Avoiding Drug Interactions." FamilyDoctor.org: "Drug Reactions." American Academy of Allergy Asthma & Immunology: "Medications and Drug Allergic Reactions: Tips to Remember," "Drug Allergy," "Drug Reactions and Drug Allergies." American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: “Drug Reactions and Drug Allergies.” UpToDate: "An approach to the patient with drug allergy," "Drug Allergy: Classification and Clinical Features," "Patient Information: Allergy to penicillin and related antibiotics (Beyond the Basics)," "Rapid drug desensitization for immediate hypersensitivity reactions." National Institutes of Health Senior Health: “Taking Medicines: Side Effects” UCLA Food and Drug Allergy Care Center: “Drug Allergy Questions and Answers” Casillas A.American Family Physician, November 2003 American Cancer Society: "Echinacea." Children's Hospital of Wisconsin: "Drug Rashes." Daftary, A.Journal of Nuclear and Medical Studies, June 2008. Epilepsy Foundation of Western Pennsylvania: "Anti-Seizure Medication and Their Side Effects." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "ACE Inhibitors." KidsHealth: "Codeine." Medscape Reference: "Drug Eruptions." National Institute of Mental Health: "Introduction: Mental Health Medications." Niggemann, B.Allergy, August 2003. North American Spine Society. The Merck Manual: "Sulfonamides." Toxicology Data Network: "Amobarbital." Solensky R.Annals of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology, October 2010. World Allergy Organization: "Drug Allergies." Levy, JH.Anaphylaxis and Adverse Drug Reactions, American Society of Anesthesiologists,  2005. Get help from methods that are medicine-free. What you should know before starting this treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.