Alopeciaareata is an autoimmune disorder that causes yourhairto come out, often in clumps the size and shape of a quarter. The amount ofhair lossis different in everyone. Some people lose it only in a few spots. Others lose a lot. Sometimes,hairgrows back but falls out again later. In others, hair grows back for good. There are different types of this condition. Alopecia areata is most common in its main form, but there are other, more rare types: The main and often the only symptom of alopecia is hair loss. You may notice: The bald patches ofskinare smooth, with norashor redness. But you may feel a tingling,itching, or burning sensation on your skin right before the hair falls out. When you have anautoimmune disease, yourimmune systemattacks your body. With alopecia areata, it’s the hair follicles that are attacked. Doctors don’t know why it happens. But they think people who get it have something in their genes that makes it more likely. Then something happens to trigger the hair loss. Learn more aboutwhat causes alopecia. You’re more likely to get alopecia areata if you have: If you think you have alopecia areata, you may want to see a skin specialist called a dermatologist. They will: Rarely, you may have abiopsy, which means a small piece of skin is removed from your scalp and looked at under a microscope. Many conditions can cause hair loss. So your doctor may test your skin for afungal infectionor give youbloodtests to check forthyroid,hormone, or immune system problems. Alopecia areata can’t be cured. But it can be treated and hair can grow back. If you have it, there are several things to try: Corticosteroids. These are anti-inflammatorydrugsthat are prescribed for autoimmune diseases. They can be given as an injection into the scalp or other areas. They can also be given as a pill or rubbed on the skin as an ointment, cream, or foam. The downside is that it may take a long time to work. Topicalimmunotherapy. This is used when there’s a lot of hair loss or if it happens more than once. Chemicals are applied to the scalp to produce anallergic reaction. If it works, this reaction is actually what makes the hair grow back. It also causes an itchy rash and usually has to be repeated several times to keep the new hair growth. Minoxidil(Rogaine). This treatment, which is put on the scalp, is already used for pattern baldness. It usually takes about 12 weeks before you see growth, and some users are disappointed in the results. Read more about which types of alopecia are most likely torespond to minoxidil. Other treatments for alopecia areata include medications that are sometimes used for other autoimmune disorders. These medicines have differing amounts of success in regrowing hair. Apart from medications, there are other things you can try if you have alopecia areata. Wear wigs, hats, or scarves. They cover your hair loss and will protect your head from the sun. Reduce stress. Personal troubles seem to trigger alopecia areata, although this has not been proven scientifically. Telogen effluvium, another form of hair loss, can also be triggered by stress. Learn more about the signs andsymptoms of telogen effluvium. Alopecia areata isn’t usually a serious medical condition, but it can cause a lot ofanxietyand sadness. Support groups are out there to help you deal with the psychological effects of the condition. If you lose all your hair, it could grow back. If it doesn’t, there are different ways to cover your hair loss and protect your scalp. If you notice sudden hair loss, always check with a doctor. There can be other reasons for it besides alopecia areata. Photo Credit: ©DermNet NZ / www.dermnetnz.org 2022 SOURCES: National Alopecia Areata Foundation. Harvard Health Publishing: “Alopecia Areata.” American Academy of Dermatology Association: “Hair Loss Types: Alopecia Areata.” UpToDate: “Patient education: Alopecia areata (Beyond the Basics).” Mayo Clinic: “Hair loss.” American Academy of Dermatology  Association – Photo CaptionNational Library of Medicine – Photo Caption Journal of the American Academy of Dematology – Photo Caption Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.