Sometimes called “mountain sickness,” altitude sickness is a group of symptoms that can strike if you walk or climb to a higher elevation, or altitude, too quickly. The pressure of the air that surrounds you is called barometric or atmospheric pressure. When you go to higher altitudes, this pressure drops and there is less oxygen available. If you live in a place that’s located at a moderately high altitude, you get used to the air pressure. But if you travel to a place at a higher altitude than you’re used to, your body will need time to adjust to the change in pressure. Any time you go above 8,000 feet, you can be at risk for altitude sickness. There are three levels of altitude sickness: Acute mountain sickness (AMS)is the mildest form, and it’s very common. The symptoms can feel like ahangover--dizziness,headache, muscle aches,nausea. High-altitudepulmonary edema(HAPE)is a buildup of fluid in thelungsthat can be very dangerous and even life-threatening. This is the most common cause of death from altitude sickness. High-altitude cerebraledema(HACE)is the most severe form of altitude sickness and happens when there’s fluid in thebrain. It, too, is life-threatening, and you need to seek medical attention right away. You might have: Symptoms usually come on within 12 to 24 hours of reaching a higher elevation and then get better within a day or two as your body adjusts to the change in altitude. If you have a more moderate case of altitude sickness, your symptoms might feel more intense and not improve with over-the-countermedications. Instead of feeling better as time goes on, you’ll start to feel worse. You’ll have more shortness of breath andfatigue. You may also have: If you develop a severe form of altitude sickness like HAPE or HACE, you might have: Anyone can develop altitude sickness, no matter how fit, young, or healthy they are -- even Olympic athletes can get it. In fact, being physically active at a high elevation makes you more likely to get it. Your chance of getting altitude sickness depends on a few other things: how quickly you move to a higher elevation, how high you go up, the altitude where yousleep, and other factors. Your risk also depends on where you live and the altitude there, your age (young people are more likely to get it), and whether you’ve had altitude sickness before. Having certain illnesses likediabetesorlung diseasedoesn’t automatically make you more likely to develop altitude sickness. People who have sickle cell anemia, COPD, unstable angina, a high-risk pregnancy, heart failure, or cystic fibrosis are less likely to be able to tolerate the change in altitude. So are people who have had recent heart attacks or strokes. If you get aheadacheand at least one other symptom linked to altitude sickness within a day or two of changing your elevation, you might have altitude sickness. For mild symptoms, you can try staying at your current altitude to see if your body adjusts. Rest, keep warm, and have plenty of liquids. Don’t go any higher until your symptoms are completely gone. If your symptoms are severe, or if mild symptoms don’t go away in a couple of days or get worse, get to a lower elevation as quickly as possible. Don’t exert yourself. Get medical help. Your doctor might listen to your chest with a stethoscope or take an X-ray of your chest or anMRIorCT scanof yourbrainto look for fluid. To treat HACE, you might need asteroidcalled dexamethasone. If you have HAPE, you will need supplemental oxygen and may need medications, as well as moving to a lower altitude. The best way you can lower your chance of getting altitude sickness is through acclimatization. That means you let your body slowly get used to the changes in air pressure as you travel to higher elevations. You’ll want to climb to higher altitudes gradually. Going slowly helps your lungs get more air through deeper breaths and allows more of your redblood cellsto carry oxygen to different parts of your body. Some basic guidelines for acclimatization are:  SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Altitude Sickness.” Harvard Health Publications: “Altitude Sickness.” Altitude.org: “Altitude Sickness.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Altitude Illness: Risk Factors, Prevention, Presentation, and Treatment.” BMJ: “Altitude illness.” FamilyDoctor.org: "High Altitude Illness: How to Avoid It and How to Treat It." CDC: "Altitude Illness," “Travelers’ Health: High-Altitude Travel and Altitude Illness.” American Heart Association: "High Altitude Sickness." American College of Emergency Physicians: "Getting High: AMS, HACE, and HAPE." Schimelpfenig, T. NOLSWilderness First Aid, Stackpole Books, 1991. Weiss, E.A Comprehensive Guide to Wilderness Travel, Adventure Medical Kits, 2005. International Society of Mountain Medicine: "An Altitude Tutorial." eMedicineHealth: “Altitude Sickness.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.