A lazy eye is when the vision of one of youreyesdoesn’t develop the way it should. Doctors also call this amblyopia. Without treatment, yourbrainwill learn to ignore the image that comes from the weakereye. That could cause permanentvisionproblems. Amblyopia starts in childhood, usually between ages 6 and 9. Identifying and treating it before age 7 brings the best chances of fully correcting the condition. Common symptoms include: Doctors don’t always know what’s behind some cases of amblyopia. Causes may include: A child might be more likely to have a lazy eye if they: All children should have vision tests before they are school-age. Your child's doctor or the vision program at school will check to make sure that: If there's any problem, the doctor or school nurse may suggest that you take your child to an eye specialist. If you feel like something is wrong with your child's vision -- even if nothing shows up at the vision check -- make an appointment with a pediatric eye doctor. Some eye care experts say kids should get aneye examat 6 months old, 3 years old, and then every year while they’re in school. Ask your doctor what’s right for your child. Eye doctors test babies and young children by watching how well their eyes follow a moving object. They may also cover one eye at a time and check the child’s reaction. In older kids, the doctor will cover one eye and use pictures and letters to check their vision. It’s important to start treatment for amblyopia as soon as possible. Depending on the cause, it might involve: Some teenagers and adults with lazy eye have successful treatment. But it may not work as well after a child’s vision has fully developed, around age 7 to 9. If one eye remains blurry and they lose vision in their stronger eye later in life, they could have lifelong problems. If treatment starts too late, the vision loss of amblyopia might be permanent because links in the body’s visual system don’t form the way they should. With early diagnosis and treatment, most children will regain almost all their vision. Make sure your child getseye examsearly on. Follow your doctor's advice about treatment, even when it’s hard to make your child do things like wear a patch every day. SOURCES: American Optometric Association. Mayo Clinic. Michigan Medicine/Kellogg Eye Center: “Amblyopia (Lazy Eye).” National Eye Institute: “Amblyopia (Lazy Eye).” American Academy of Ophthalmology: “Amblyopia.” Mayo Clinic: “Lazy eye (amblyopia).” Harvard Health Publishing: “Lazy Eye (Amblyopia).” Cleveland Clinic: “Amblyopia (Lazy Eye).”  Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.