Amyloidosis is when an abnormal protein called amyloid builds up in your tissues and organs. When it does, it affects their shape and how they work. Amyloidosis is a serious health problem that can lead to life-threatening organ failure. Many different proteins can lead to amyloid deposits, but only a few have been linked to major health problems. The type of protein and where it collects tells the type of amyloidosis you have. Amyloid deposits may collect throughout your body or in just one area. The different types of amyloidosis include: AL amyloidosis (immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis).This is the most common type and used to be called primary amyloidosis. AL stands for “amyloid light chains,” which is the type of protein responsible for the condition. There’s no known cause, but it happens when your bone marrow makes abnormal antibodies that can’t be broken down. It’s linked with a blood cancer called multiple myeloma. It can affect your kidneys, heart, liver, intestines, and nerves. AA amyloidosis.Previously known as secondary amyloidosis, this condition is the result of another chronic infectious or inflammatory disease such as rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease, or ulcerative colitis. It mostly affects your kidneys, but it can also affect your digestive tract, liver, and heart. AA means the amyloid type A protein causes this type. Dialysis-related amyloidosis (DRA).This is more common in older adults and people who have been on dialysis for more than 5 years. This form of amyloidosis is caused by deposits of beta-2 microglobulin that build up in the blood. Deposits can build up in many different tissues, but it most commonly affects bones, joints, and tendons. Familial, or hereditary, amyloidosis.This is a rare form passed down through families. It often affects the liver, nerves, heart, and kidneys. Many genetic defects are linked to a higher chance of amyloid disease. For example, an abnormal protein like transthyretin (TTR) is usually the cause. Age-related (senile)systemic amyloidosis.This is caused by deposits of normal TTR in the heart and other tissues. It happens most commonly in older men. Organ-specific amyloidosis.This causes deposits of amyloid protein in single organs, including the skin (cutaneous amyloidosis). Though some types of amyloid deposits have been linked to Alzheimer's disease, the brain is rarely affected by amyloidosis that happens throughout your body. Men get amyloidosis more often than women. Your risk for amyloidosis goes up as you grow older. Amyloidosis affects 15% of patients with a form of cancer called multiple myeloma. Amyloidosis may also happen in people with end-stage kidney disease who are on dialysis for a long time (see "Dialysis-related amyloidosis" above). Symptoms of amyloidosis are often subtle. They can also vary greatly depending on where the amyloid protein is collecting in the body. It is important to note that the symptoms described below may be due to a variety of health problems. Only your doctor can make a diagnosis of amyloidosis. General symptoms of amyloidosis may include: This condition can cause less blood to flow to your heart muscle. Eventually, your heart will no longer be able to pump normally. Some doctors also call cardiac amyloidosis “stiff heart syndrome.” Others say a stiff heart is actually a symptom of cardiac amyloidosis. Either way, amyloid deposits in your heart can make the muscular walls of your heart stiff. They can also make your heart muscle weaker and affect the electrical rhythm of the heart. Stiff heart syndrome can be serious. It may lead to congestive heart failure if it's not successfully treated. Who’s at risk?Cardiac amyloidosis is more common in men than in women. It’s also more likely to affect older people. People under 40 rarely get the condition. You can inherit stiff heart syndrome. Other things that raise your chances of getting it are: What are the symptoms?If amyloidosis affects your heart, some symptoms you might notice are: These can be signs of other health conditions, too. So see your doctor to figure out what’s going on. How is it diagnosed?Your doctor will ask you about your symptoms and whether anyone in your family has cardiac amyloidosis or other heart conditions. They’ll give you a physical exam, too. The doctor may do several tests to diagnose or rule out cardiac amyloidosis, like: What are the treatments?There’s more than one type of cardiac amyloidosis. Your treatment will depend on the type you have. Among the options your doctor might recommend are: While some of these treatments, like chemo and immunotherapy, are also used to treat cancer, cardiac amyloidosis isn't cancer. It's a disease that affects the heart muscle. There's no cure, but there are treatments for most types of cardiac amyloidosis. Getting an early diagnosis is important since treatment can prevent permanent damage. Your kidneys filter waste and toxins from your blood. Amyloid deposits in the kidneys make it hard for them to do this job. When your kidneys do not work properly, water and dangerous toxins build up in your body. If amyloidosis affects the kidneys, you may have: Amyloid deposits along your gastrointestinal (GI) tract slow down the movement of food through your intestines. This interferes with digestion. If amyloidosis affects your GI tract, you may have: If your liver is affected, that can cause liver enlargement and fluid buildup in the body. Amyloid deposits can damage the nerves outside your brain and spinal cord, called the peripheral nerves. The peripheral nerves carry information between your brain and spinal cord and the rest of your body. For example, they make your brain perceive pain if you burn your hand or stub your toes. If amyloidosis affects your nerves, you may have: A thorough physical exam and a detailed and accurate account of your medical history are crucial in helping your doctor diagnose amyloidosis. Blood and urine tests can spot abnormal proteins. Depending on your symptoms, your doctor may also check your thyroid and liver. Your doctor will do a biopsy to confirm a diagnosis of amyloidosis and know the specific type of protein you have. The tissue sample for the biopsy may be taken from your belly fat (the abdominal fat pad), bone marrow, or sometimes your mouth, rectum, or other organs. It's not always necessary to biopsy the part of the body damaged by the amyloid deposits. Imaging tests can also help. They show the amount of damage to organs like your heart, liver, or spleen. Your doctor will do a genetic test if they think you have a type that is passed down through families. Treatment for hereditary amyloidosis is different from treatment for other types of the disease. Once you’re diagnosed, your doctor might check your heart with an echocardiogram or your liver and spleen with imaging tests. There is no cure for amyloidosis. Your doctor will prescribe treatments to slow the development of the amyloid protein and manage your symptoms. If amyloidosis is related to another condition, then treatment will include targeting that underlying condition. Specific treatment depends on what type of amyloidosis you have and how many organs are affected. Other treatments to help with symptoms include: Amyloidosis can be deadly, especially if it affects your heart or kidneys. Early diagnosis and treatment are important and can help improve survival. Researchers continue to question why some types of amyloid make people sick and how the formation of amyloid can be stopped. Studies to find new treatments are ongoing. If you have amyloidosis, consider asking your doctor if there are any clinical trials you can join, or search for one by visiting www.clinicaltrials.gov and typing in the search term "amyloidosis." SOURCES: National Amyloidosis Centre: "Amyloidosis Overview." MedLine Plus: "Amyloidosis." National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Clearinghouse: "Amyloidosis and Kidney Disease." American Society of Clinical Oncology: "Amyloidosis." Amyloidosis Foundation: "Amyloidosis Information: A General Overview for Patients." Mayo Clinic: “Amyloidosis.” Johns Hopkins: “Cardiac Amyloidosis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Cardiac Amyloidosis.” Franciscan Health: “What Is Stiff Heart Syndrome?” Yale Medicine: “Cardiac Amyloidosis.” Canadian Medical Association Journal: “Stiff heart syndrome.” What are they and why do we need them? See it in pictures, plus read the facts. Fight cancer one plate at a time. Do you know the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.