Anaplastic large-celllymphoma(ALCL) is a rare type ofblood cancer. It's more common in young people, mostly boys. It doesn't run in families. ALCL is a serious illness. It can be fast growing, and it often returns. Treatments can help you fight it. Other therapies can help you feel better. Scientists are still looking for new and better ways to treat both the disease and the symptoms. When you have lymphoma, cells called lymphocytes grow out of control. These are whiteblood cellsthat usually fight infection. With ALCL, they build up in small glands called lymph nodes or in other parts of your body, like yourlungsorskin. ALCL can show up in two ways: Doctors will also need to find out whether yourcancerhas a certain protein, called ALK. Researchers don't know what causes ALCL, but they do know it isn't inherited. Often, the first sign of systemic ALCL is swelling in the neck,armpit, or groin, where your legs meet the trunk of your body. You may also have symptoms like: With cutaneous ALCL, you may first notice one or more raised, red bumps on the skin that don't go away. These are tumors. They can form open sores, and they may itch. When you come in for a visit, your doctor will want to know: To see if you have ALCL, doctors may take abiopsyfrom aswollen lymph node. It's quick and doesn't require a hospital stay. Doctors make a small cut in the skin and remove all or part of the lymph node, or use a needle to take a sample. They look at the cells under a microscope. Other tests may be needed, such as: These tests look to see where and how much thecancerhas spread. This is called staging. It helps you and your doctor decide the right treatment.  No matter what form of ALCL you have, there are treatments to help. And researchers are hopeful tthere will be new and better options in the future. Your treatment choices will depend on the type of ALCL you have and where it is in the body. Chemotherapyis the main treatment for systemic ALCL, when the cancer is in your lymph nodes and other parts of the body. A kind of chemotherapy called CHOP is used for both ALK-positive and ALK-negative ALCL. The therapy gets its name for the first letters of the drugs it uses:Cytoxan,hydroxydaunorubicin,Oncovin, andprednisolone.  If your cancer is ALK-negative, doctors may use CHOP at higher doses. If your cancer doesn't respond to CHOP, you may get another drug calledbrentuximab vedotin(Adcetris). A stem cell transplant may also be an option for you, but it's a complicated and risky procedure. It's usually only done when other treatments have failed. Doctors injectstem cellsinto your body to help you grow new cancer-free ones. Thestem cellscome from your own body, or from a closely matched donor. For primary cutaneous ALCL, treatment may include: If the cancer is in many areas of the skin, you may need a combination of chemotherapy drugs. Being diagnosed with cancer can make you feel like you've lost control. Remember that you're in charge of your treatment decisions and how you live your life. While you are getting treatment, you may not feel your best. Some treatments, like chemotherapy, have side effects. You may feel weak or tired, and you may be sick to yourstomach To help you feel better: Don't miss regular doctor appointments. They're key to finding out how well the treatment is going, and to deciding if any changes are needed. Every situation is different, but treatment to fight ALCL can work well. Sometimes, the cancer comes back. Ask your doctor what to watch for, and listen to your body. The treatments can bring discomfort. Make sure your doctor knows how you're feeling. Take advantage of other therapies that can ease symptoms and help you feel better. A serious illness is hard for the whole family. It's natural that you will have questions, concerns, and frustrations. Find the support you need, and ask for help when you need it. Keep informed about research that's under way. You may be able to take part in a clinical trial. You can find out more information on anaplastic large-cell lymphoma on the web site of theLymphoma Research Foundation. It has links to help you find the support of people and families who have ALCL, and to information about clinical trials. SOURCES: Blood and Lymphatic Centers Leukaemia Care: "Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma." Canadian Cancer Society: "Anaplastic large cell lymphoma." Focus on Large Cell Lymphoma: "Treatment Options." Leukaemia Foundation: "Fact Sheet: Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma." Lymphoma Research Foundation: "Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma." FDA: "Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL) In Women with Breast Implants: Preliminary FDA Findings and Analyses." Lamant, L.Haematologica,March 2010. National Cancer Institute: "What You Need to Know About Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma." Pagination What are they and why do we need them? See it in pictures, plus read the facts. Fight cancer one plate at a time. Do you know the symptoms? © 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.