The physical exam is an essential part of any doctor's visit. Surprisingly, though, there are no absolutes in a routine physical. A good doctor may be thorough or brief, but they will spend time listening to your concerns and providing counseling for your particular complaints and risk factors. Annual exams usually check your: History.This is your chance to mention any complaints or concerns about your health. Your doctor will also likely quiz you about lifestyle behaviors like smoking, excessive alcohol use, sexual health, diet, and exercise. The doctor will also check on your vaccination status and update your personal and family medical history. Vital Signs.These are some vital signs checked by your doctor: General Appearance.Your doctor gathers a large amount of information about you and your health just by watching and talking to you. How is your memory and mental quickness? Does yourskinappear healthy? Can you easily stand and walk? Heart Exam.Listening to your heart with a stethoscope, a doctor might detect anirregular heartbeat, aheart murmur, or other clues to heart disease. LungExam.Using a stethoscope, a doctor listens for crackles, wheezes, or decreased breath sounds. These and other sounds are clues to the presence of heart orlung disease. Head and Neck Exam.Opening up and saying "ah" shows off your throat andtonsils. The quality of yourteethand gums also provides information about your overall health. Ears, nose,sinuses,eyes, lymph nodes,thyroid, and carotidarteriesmay also be examined. Abdominal Exam.Your doctor can use a range of examination techniques including tapping yourabdomento detectliversize and presence of abdominal fluid, listening for bowel sounds with a stethoscope, and palpating for tenderness. Neurological Exam.Nerves, muscle strength, reflexes, balance, and mental state may be assessed. Dermatological Exam.Skin and nail findings could indicate a dermatological problem or disease somewhere else in the body. Extremities Exam.Your doctor will look for physical and sensory changes. Pulses can be checked in your arms and legs. Examining joints can assess for abnormalities. An annual physical exam for men might also include: A woman's annual exam might include: There are no standard laboratory tests during an annual physical. However, some doctors will order certain tests routinely: Unless symptoms already suggest a problem, however, these tests are unlikely to provide useful information. A screeninglipid panel(cholesteroltest) is recommended every 4 to 6 years, according to the American Heart Association. Your doctor might check more frequently if you have risk factors forheart disease. Abnormalcholesterol levelsincrease the risk forheart attacksand strokes. If you are overweight or have any risk factors for diabetes, your blood sugar will likely be checked. The American Diabetes Association recommends that all adults, beginning at age 45, should be tested for diabetes -- regardless of weight. The CDC recommends that everyone over the age of 18 get screened at some point for hepatitis C. This may happen during one of your physicals. The annual physical exam is a great opportunity to refocus your attention on prevention and screening: Healthy behaviors work far better than medicine at preventing illness, and don't require a prescription:  The annual physical exam is beloved by many people and their doctors. But studies show that the actual exam isn't very helpful in discovering problems and may lead to unnecessary tests. Leading doctors and medical groups have called the annual physical exam "not necessary" in generally healthy people. Exercising, keeping a healthy weight, and not smoking are enough to keep most of us in good health, with or without an annual exam. Still, no one can argue with keeping up a good relationship with your doctor through regular visits. As long as you and your doctor are paying attention to prevention and your overall health, the details are up to you. SOURCES: Laine, C.Annals of Internal Medicine,2002. U.S. News and World Reportweb site: "Do You Actually Need a Physical Exam?" MedicineNet web site: "Annual Physical Exam: Unneeded Expense?" Centers for Disease Control. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. American Heart Association: "How to Get Your Cholesterol Tested." Diabetes Care, January 2016, Supplement 1. American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Early Detection of Cancer.  © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.