Acute respiratory distress syndrome(ARDS) is a condition that causes fluid to build up in yourlungsso oxygen can’t get to your organs. Fluid leaks from small blood vessels and collects in tiny air sacs in your lungs so they can’t fill with enough air. Because of this, yourbloodcan’t pick up the oxygen it needs to carry to the rest of your body. Organs such as yourkidneysorbrainmight not work the way they should or might shut down. ARDS is sometimes life-threatening and can get worse quickly. But it’s generally treatable, and most people recover. Fast diagnosis and treatment are important. ARDS is usually triggered by another health problem, so most people who have it are already in the hospital for something else. Causes of ARDS include: Sepsis.This is when you get an infection in your bloodstream and yourimmune systemgoes into overdrive, causinginflammation, smallblood clots, and bleeding. Accidents.Injuries from a car wreck or a fall can damage your lungs or the part of your brain that controlsbreathing. Breathing in harmful things.Dense smoke or chemical fumes can trigger ARDS. Other possible causes of ARDS include: Doctors don’t know why some people get ARDS and others don’t. Risk factors include:  ARDS puts a lot of strain on your lungs. Symptoms include:  No single test can identify ARDS. It’s more of a puzzle that your doctor pieces together. They’ll want to rule out conditions that can have similar symptoms. Your doctor will ask about your medical history, do aphysical exam, and listen to your breathing and your heartbeat. They may also look for: Tests to help with diagnosis include: Imaging tests.A chest X-ray is crucial and probably the first test your doctor will order. You might also have aCT scan. These can give your doctor an idea of how much fluid is in your lungs and where it is. Blood tests.These check your oxygen level. They can also look for signs of infection oranemia, a lack of red blood cells. Heart tests.These can rule out conditions such asheart failure(when yourheartdoesn’t pump blood through your body the way it should). Treatment aims to get the oxygen levels in your blood up to where they should be, so your organs get what they need. In some cases, your doctor might give you an air mask and later go to a breathing tube and ventilator (a machine that helps you breathe). Your doctor will also treat other conditions that might be causing ARDS. Treatments include: Most ARDS treatment is done in a hospital’s intensive care unit. Many people have a full recovery with no long-term problems. The condition or its treatment can lead to other problems, including:  If you’ve recently had ARDS, improve your recovery by: You might need to be on a ventilator for a while. ARDS can leave you weak, so you may go tophysical therapyto get stronger. ARDS can be emotionally and physically tough on patients and families. A support group may help withanxiety,stress, ordepression. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “ARDS.” NIH. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “What Is ARDS?” “Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome.” American Lung Association: “Learn About ARDS,” “Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS).” American Thoracic Society: “What is Acute Respiratory Syndrome?” Cleveland Clinic: “Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS),” “Atelectasis.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS).” You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.