If you need improvement in health problems fromanxietyto poorsleep, you may want to consideraromatherapy. In this kind of treatment, you use extracts from plants called essential oils, by eitherbreathingthem through your nose or putting them on yourskin. Some people put the oils on their skin when they get amassageor take a bath. Essential oilsare made from flower, herb, and tree parts, like bark, roots, peels, and petals. The cells that give a plant its fragrant smell are its "essence." When an essence is extracted from a plant, it becomes an essential oil. It takes a lot of plant product to make essential oils. More than 200 pounds of lavender flowers are used to make just 1 pound of lavender essential oil. Not all products made with plant essence are essential oils. True essential oils aren't blended with other chemicals or fragrances. They're made using a specific process that doesn't change the chemistry of the plant. Lemon, chamomile, lavender, cedarwood, and bergamot are a few of the essential oils used regularly inaromatherapy. Experts think aromatherapy activates areas in your nose called smell receptors, which send messages through your nervous system to yourbrain. The oils may activate certain areas of yourbrain, like your limbic system, which plays a role in your emotions. They could also have an impact on your hypothalamus, which may respond to the oil by creating feel-goodbrainchemicals like serotonin. Some experts think that when you put essential oils on your skin, they cause a response in your skin and other parts of your body, like your joints. You shouldn't use aromatherapy instead of your regular medical treatment. But for some conditions, research shows that aromatherapy can have health benefits. It may:  Aromatherapy is generally safe. Essential oils can cause side effects, though. Some can irritate youreyes, skin, ormucous membranesin your nose. They can also cause mild allergic reactions. If you drink some essential oils they can hurt yourkidneysorliver. It's rare that people take essential oils bymouth, and you shouldn't do it unless your doctor says it's OK. If you're new to aromatherapy, work with an aromatherapist or your doctor. And keep in mind that essential oils aren't regulated by the FDA, which means that unlikedrugs, the agency doesn't check to see if they're safe or work the way they're supposed to. SOURCES: National Center for Complimentary and Integrative Health: "Aromatherapy." Mayo Clinic: "What are the benefits of aromatherapy?" National Cancer Institute: "Aromatherapy and Essential Oils." University of Minnesota: "How Do Essential Oils Work?" FDA: "Aromatherapy." Asian Pacific Journal of Tropical Biomedicine: "Essential oils used in aromatherapy: A systemic review." Keep calm by adding these to your diet. Beyond a pounding heart and a knotted stomach. From time management to lifestyle changes. How eating high-fat foods can slow your metabolism. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.