Reactive arthritis, formerly referred to as Reiter's syndrome, is a form ofarthritisthat affects the joints,eyes, urethra (the tube that carries urine from thebladderto the outside of the body), andskin. The disease is recognized by various symptoms in different organs of the body that may or may not appear at the same time. It may come on quickly and severely or more slowly, with sudden remissions or recurrences. Reactive arthritis primarily affects sexually active males between the ages of 20 and 40. Those withHIV(human immunodeficiency virus) are at a particularly high risk. The cause of reactive arthritis is still unknown, but research suggests the disease is caused, in part, by a genetic predisposition: Approximately 75% of those with the condition have a positivebloodtest for the genetic marker HLA-B27. In sexually active males, most cases of reactive arthritis follow infection withChlamydiatrachomatisorUreaplasma urealyticum, both sexually transmitted diseases. In other cases, people develop the symptoms following an intestinal infection with shigella,salmonella, yersinia, or campylobacter bacteria. Besides usingcondomsduring sexual activity, there is no known preventative measure for reactivearthritis. The first symptoms of reactive arthritis arepainful urinationand a discharge from thepenisif there isinflammationof the urethra.Diarrheamay occur if theintestinesare affected. This is then followed by arthritis four to 28 days later that usually affects the fingers, toes,ankles, hips, andkneejoints. Typically, only one or a few of these joints may be affected at one time. Other symptoms include:  Diagnosis of reactive arthritis can be complicated by the fact that symptoms often occur several weeks apart. A doctor may diagnose reactive arthritis when the patient's arthritis occurs together with or shortly following inflammation of the eye and the urinary tract and lasts a month or longer. There is no specific test for diagnosing reactive arthritis, but the doctor may check the urethral discharge forsexually transmitted diseases. Stool samples may also be tested for signs of infection. Blood tests of reactive arthritis patients are typically positive for the HLA-B27 genetic marker, with an elevated white blood cell count and an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) -- both signs of inflammation. The patient may also be mildly anemic (having too few redblood cellsin the bloodstream). X-rays of the joints outside the back do not usually reveal any abnormalities unless the patient has had recurrent episodes of the disease. On an X-ray, joints that have been repeatedly inflamed may show areas ofbone loss,signs of osteoporosis, or bony spurs. Joints in the back and pelvis (sacroiliacjoints) may show abnormalities and damage from reactive arthritis. Bacterial infections, such as chlamydia, will need to be treated withantibiotics. Joint inflammation from reactive arthritis is usually treated withnonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), such asnaproxen,aspirin, oribuprofen. Skin eruptions andeyeinflammation can be treated withsteroids. Those with chronic disease may be prescribed othermedications, includingmethotrexate. Patients with chronic arthritis also may be referred to aphysical therapistand may be advised toexerciseregularly. The prognosis for reactive arthritis varies. Most people recover in three to four months, but about half have recurrences for several years. Some people develop complications that may include inflammation of theheartmuscle, inflammation with stiffening of the spine,glaucoma, progressive blindness, feet abnormalities, or accumulation of fluid in thelungs.  SOURCES:Arthritis Foundation.American Academy of Family Physicians.The Arthritis Society. Things you do each day could be causing your pain. Learn what happens during and after the procedure. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.