Bursitisis inflammation or irritation of a bursa sac. You have these sacs all over your body. They’re filled with fluid that eases rubbing and friction between tissues like bones, muscles, tendons, and skin. Bursitis is common around major joints like your shoulder, elbow, hip, or knee. Bursitis is common in adults, especially after age 40. It’s usually caused by repeated pressure on an area or by using a joint too much. High-risk activities include gardening, raking, carpentry, shoveling, painting, scrubbing, tennis, golf, skiing, and throwing. You can also get bursitis by sitting or standing the wrong way for a long time at work or home, or by not stretching enough before you exercise. Sudden injury can sometimes cause bursitis. As you age, your tendons aren’t able to handle stress as well. They’re less elastic and easier to tear. If there’s a problem with the structure of a bone or joint (such as legs that are different lengths orarthritisin a joint), that can put more stress on a bursa, causing bursitis. Reactions to medications and stress or inflammation from other conditions, such asrheumatoid arthritis,gout,psoriatic arthritis, orthyroid disorders, may also raise your risk.   An infection, especially withStaphylococcus aureusbacteria, can sometimes cause bursitis. Bursitis might affect your: Pain is the most common symptom of bursitis. It might build up slowly or be sudden and severe, especially if you havecalciumdeposits in the area. You’ll probably feel it when you stretch or extend the joint, and you may have limited range of motion even without pain. Your joint might also be: Call your doctor if you have: These could be signs of an infection or another problem that needs medical care right away. You can’t always prevent bursitis, but some steps can lower your risk. Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and do a physical exam to see if the joint is swollen. You might also have tests including: Take these steps to treat bursitis: See your doctor if you don’t feel better after a week. They might give you medications like steroids, which work quickly to lower inflammation and pain. Your doctor might prescribe pills to swallow or use a needle to inject them into the irritated area. They might also inject pain medications. Physical therapycan help you strengthen muscles and give you more range of motion in the joint. If you have an infected bursa, your doctor might use a needle to take out fluid. You’ll probably need antibiotics. It’s rare, but you might need surgery if other treatments aren’t helping. Arthritis Foundation: “Bursitis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Bursitis.” TeensHealth.org: “Bursitis.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Bursitis.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Bursitis.” National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: “Bursitis.” Mayo Clinic: “Bursitis.” Jonathan Cluett, MD, orthopedic surgeon, Massachusetts. American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Hip Bursitis.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Bursitis of the Hip.” National Health Services: “Treating bursitis.” University of North Carolina Sports Medicine and Family Medicine: “Trochanteric Bursitis.” Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.