Sarcoidosisis an inflammatory disease that affects multiple organs in the body, but mostly thelungsand lymph glands. In people with sarcoidosis, abnormal masses or nodules (called granulomas) consisting of inflamed tissues form in certain organs of the body. These granulomas may alter the normal structure and possibly the function of the affected organ(s). The symptoms of sarcoidosis can vary greatly, depending on which organs are involved. Most patients initially complain of a persistent drycough,fatigue, and shortness of breath. Other symptoms may include: In some people, symptoms may begin suddenly and/or severely and subside in a short period of time. Others may have no outward symptoms at all even though organs are affected. Still others may have symptoms that appear slowly and subtly, but which last or recur over a long time span. Sarcoidosis most often occurs between 20 and 40 years of age, with women being diagnosed more frequently than men. The disease is 10 to 17 times more common in African-Americans than in Caucasians. People of Scandinavian, German, Irish, or Puerto Rican origin are also more prone to the disease. It is estimated that up to four in 10,000 people in the U.S. have sarcoidosis. The exact cause of sarcoidosis is not known. It may be a type ofautoimmune diseaseassociated with an abnormal immune response, but what triggers this response is uncertain. How sarcoidosis spreads from one part of the body to another is still being studied. There is no single way to diagnose sarcoidosis, since all the symptoms and laboratory results can occur in other diseases. For this reason, your doctor will carefully review your medical history and examine you to determine if you have sarcoidosis. The main tools your doctor will use to diagnose sarcoidosis include: There is no cure for sarcoidosis, but the disease may get better on its own over time. Many people with sarcoidosis have mild symptoms and do not require any treatment. Treatment, when it is needed, is given to reduce symptoms and to maintain the proper working order of the affected organs. Treatments generally fall into two categories -- maintenance of good health practices and drug treatment. Good health practices include: Drug treatments are used to relieve symptoms and reduce theinflammationof the affected tissues. The oral corticosteroidprednisoneis the most commonly used treatment.Fatigueand persistentcoughare usually improved with steroid treatment. Ifsteroidsare prescribed, you should see your doctor at regular intervals so that they can monitor the disease and the side effects of treatment. Other treatment options includehydroxychloroquine(Plaquenil),methotrexate(Otrexup,Rheumatrex), and other drugs. In many people with sarcoidosis, the disease appears briefly and then disappears without the person even knowing they have the disease. Twenty percent to 30% of people have some permanent lung damage. For a small number of people, sarcoidosis is a chronic condition. In some people, the disease may result in the deterioration of the affected organ. Rarely, sarcoidosis can be fatal. Death usually is the result of complications with the lungs, heart, orbrain.  SOURCE:National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.American Lung Association. You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.