Aspirinhas been used as apainreliever for more than 100 years. Since the 1970s, it’s also been used to prevent andmanage heart diseaseandstroke. Now, a top U.S. panel of health experts has published recommendations that aim to limit people’s use of daily aspirin to prevent a first heart attack or stroke. Here’s what you need to know about the finalized guideline changes, aspirin’s benefits and risks, and why it’s important to talk to your doctor to find out if taking it daily is right for you.  The recommendations come from an independent panel of experts in disease prevention and evidence-based medicine called the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF). The group has revamped its 2016 guidelines on aspirin after reviewing newer studies. In 2021, it released a draft version of proposed changes and made them available for public comment. Now, the task force has published its final recommendations: These recommendations aren’t meant for everyone, the USPSTF says. Ask your doctor what you should do if you: If you’re already taking aspirin because you’ve had a heart attack or stroke, don’t stop taking it unless your doctor tells you to, the task force says. It easesinflammation.Plaque may be more likely to cause aheart attackorstrokeif it’s inflamed. Aspirin blocks an enzyme called cyclooxygenase. That makes your body less likely to produce chemicals that can help causeinflammation. It helps preventblood clots.Some chemicals in thebloodtrigger events that cause blood clots. When aspirin stops those chemicals, it helps slow the formation of the clots. That’s important because they can clog thearteriesthat bringbloodtoheartmuscle and thebrain, which increases your risk ofheart attackandstroke. It might reduce your risk of death.A low-dose aspirin might be considered to prevent a first heart attack and stroke in a select group of adults between 40-59 who aren't at increased risk of bleeding. If you have symptoms of a heart attack, call 911 right away. If you don’t have an aspirinallergy, EMS personnel may ask you to chew one standard, 325-milligram aspirin slowly. It's especially effective if you take it within 30 minutes of your first symptoms. If you’re at risk for heart disease, carrying an aspirin with you in case of emergency might be a lifesaving technique. Talk to your doctor about the benefits and risks of aspirin therapy before you begin a regular regimen. Research says between 80 milligrams and 160 milligrams per day. This is less than half of the standard 325-milligram aspirin most people are prescribed. Many studies show the lower dose works just as well as the higher dose. It also drops your risk ofinternal bleeding. A baby aspirin contains 81 milligrams. There are other lower-dose adult aspirins available. Check with your doctor first to find out what dose is right for you. First, tell your doctor if you are allergic to aspirin, ibuprofen, ornaproxen. If you get the go-ahead to start an aspirin routine, then: Ask your doctor what other medicines you can take for pain relief or minorcoldswhile you take aspirin. Read the labels of all pain relievers andcoldproducts to make sure they’re aspirin-free. Other drugs with aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may cause bleeding when taken with your regular aspirin therapy. Before any surgery, dental procedure, or emergency treatment, tell the doctor or dentist that you’re taking aspirin. You might need to stop taking it for 5 to 7 days before your procedure. However, don’t stop taking this medicine without first consulting with your doctor. Talk with your doctor about whether aspirin might be a good idea for you. Yes. Some common ones include: Call your doctor if any of these become severe or do not go away. Contact them right away if you have: Call 911 if the person is: For an overdose ofaspirin: SOURCES: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: “Task Force Issues Draft Recommendation Statement on Aspirin Use to Prevent Cardiovascular Disease,” “Task Force Finalizes Recommendations on Starting Aspirin Use to Prevent a First Heart Attack or Stroke.” Cleveland Clinic Heart Center. American Heart Association. CDC. American Association of Poison Control Centers: "First Aid Tips." Minnesota Poison Control System: "Poison First Aid: What to Do if Poisoned." Subbarao, I.American Medical Association Handbook of First Aid and Emergency Care,Random House Reference, 2009. Merck Manual: "Aspirin and Other Salicylate Poisoning." Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.