Autoimmune hemolyticanemia, or AIHA, is a rare type ofanemia. When you have anemia, your bone marrow doesn't make enough redblood cells. Or these cells don't work as well as they should. Redblood cellscarry oxygen to your body. When you have too few red blood cells, your body can't get enough oxygen, leaving you feelingtiredor short of breath. Red blood cells are made in the spongy material called bone marrow deep inside your bones. These blood cells normally live for about 120 days. If you have autoimmune hemolytic anemia, your body’s immune system attacks and destroys red blood cells faster than your bone marrow can make new ones. Sometimes these red blood cells live for only a few days. Most people who get AIHA are middle-aged or older. It’s rare in children, and it usually shows up soon after a viral illness and goes away on its own. If your teenager gets it, it could be a sign they have some other health problem. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia is classified in a few different ways: The disease is also classified by the temperature at which red blood cells are damaged: Many of the symptoms of AIHA are the same as those of other forms of anemia. You may have: Some symptoms are different depending on which type of AIHA you have. With cold antibody hemolytic anemia, you may also notice: You can get autoimmune hemolytic anemia if you have anautoimmune diseaselikelupus. Normally when yourimmune systemspots foreign invaders like bacteria and viruses, it makesproteinscalled antibodies to attack them. When you have AIHA, yourimmune systemmakes antibodies that mistakenly attack your own red blood cells. Other diseases andmedicationscan also cause autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Some of these are:  If you think you could have any type of anemia, you should talk to your doctor. They may refer you to a hematologist, a doctor who specializes in blood diseases. They’ll most likely discuss your past medical history, medications you take, and talk about your symptoms. They’ll  also request a blood test called a complete blood count, orCBC, to look for signs of anemia. This test measures: A low red blood cell count and low hemoglobin and hematocrit levels are signs of anemia. If your CBC test results point to anemia, the doctor might want to do more tests. You might get one of these: If you have a disease likelupusthat’s causing your anemia, your doctor will treat it first. If a medication is the cause, you'll likely have to stop taking that medicine. If your AIHA is mild, you may not need treatment. Doctors usually first prescribesteroids, such ashydrocortisoneorprednisone, to stop your immune system from attacking your red blood cells. A medicine called rituximab may make steroids work even better. If you don’t improve, you may need surgery to remove your spleen. That’s where much of the destruction of red blood cells takes place. Other medicines such asazathioprine(Imuran) andcyclophosphamide(Cytoxan) can be used to suppress the immune system. You may need a blood transfusion. SOURCES: American Association of Clinical Chemistry: "Hemolytic Anemias.," “Haptoglobin,” “ Cold Agglutinins.” National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "How is Hemolytic Anemia Diagnosed?" "Types of Hemolytic Anemia," "What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Hemolytic Anemia?"  "What Is Anemia?" National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Anemia, Hemolytic, Acquired Autoimmune." Orphanet: "Autoimmune hemolytic anemia." Medscape: “Hemolytic Anemia.” The University of Chicago Pediatrics Clerkship: “Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia.” Merck Manual: “Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.