Autosomal dominantpolycystic kidney disease(ADPKD) causes a lot of fluid-filled sacs, called cysts, to grow in yourkidneys. The cysts keep your kidneys from working as they should. That can cause health problems likehigh blood pressure, infections, andkidney stones. It can also cause kidney failure, although that doesn't happen to everyone. You can have ADPKD and not know it for many years. It’s often called “adult PKD,” because the symptoms don't usually appear until people reach ages 30 to 40. Over time, ADPKD can start to damage your kidneys. You can slow the damage and prevent some of the complications by makinghealthy habits(especially those that help you lower and then maintain yourblood pressure) part of your life and takingmedicationsas necessary. Depending on the type of ADPKD you have, you can lead an active life for many years by managing your symptoms and working with your doctor. There’s not a cure, but scientists are doing research to look for new treatments. Not everyone with ADPKD will have symptoms. Those who do may not notice anything for many years. Most people with the disease havehigh blood pressure. Urinary tract infections andkidney stonesare also common. Other signs that you have ADPKD include: Over time, cysts may grow big enough to damage your kidneys and, for some people, can cause them to fail. If that happens, you may have:  ADPKD is caused by a problem with one of two genes in your DNA -- PKD1 or PKD2. These genes make proteins in kidney cells that let them know when to grow. A problem with either gene causes kidney cells to grow out of control and form cysts. Many genetic diseases happen when a person gets broken genes from both parents, but with ADPKD, you need only one faulty gene to have the disease. That's why this kind of PKD is called “autosomal dominant,” meaning only one parent has to pass on a broken gene. If one parent has the disease, each child has a 50-50 chance of getting it. You can get ADPKD even if neither of your parents had the disease. This happens when one of your PKD genes gets a defect on its own. But it’s rare for someone to get it this way. If your doctor thinks there’s a problem with your kidneys, they may want you to see a nephrologist, a specialist who treats kidney diseases. They’ll ask you questions like: The doctor will do some tests to get images of your kidneys and check them for cysts. They may start with anultrasound, which uses sound waves to make a picture of the inside of your body. To look for cysts that are too small for an ultrasound to find, they could also use: Doctors can also test your DNA to see if you have a broken PKD1 or PKD2 gene. But it’s important to know the limits of the test. It can show if you have the gene, but it can’t tell you when you’ll get ADPKD or how severe it will be.  There is no cure for ADPKD, but you can treat the health problems that the disease causes and possibly prevent kidney failure. You may need: If your kidneys fail, you’ll needdialysis, which uses a machine to filter your blood and remove waste, like salt, extra water, and certain chemicals. You can also get on a waiting list or receive a kidney from a living donor for a kidney transplant. Ask your doctor if that’s a good option for you. It's important to stay as healthy as possible to protect your kidneys and keep them working as long as you can. Follow your doctor's advice carefully. You can also keep up these habits to stay well:  Cysts often grow very slowly. They can grow even slower when you control your blood pressure and make healthy lifestyle choices. But after many years, they can get large enough to damage your kidneys. As time goes on, some people have kidney failure and need dialysis or a kidney transplant. How quickly the disease gets worse may depend on which of your two PKD genes is broken. People with a defect in the PKD1 gene tend to get kidney failure before those with a problem in PKD2. ADPKD can also raise your risk for other health problems, such as:  For more information on ADPKD, visit the website of thePKD Foundation. SOURCES: National Human Genome Research Institute: "Learning About Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease." National Kidney Foundation: "Polycystic Kidney Disease." PKD International: "ADPKD." PKD Foundation: "Common Questions About How PKD Will Affect Your Health." International Journal of Nephrology and Renovascular Disease: "Polycystic kidney disease: inheritance, pathophysiology, prognosis, and treatment." Mayo Clinic: “Polycystic kidney disease.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.