Avascular necrosis(AVN) is the death of bone tissue due to a loss of blood supply.  You might also hear it called osteonecrosis, aseptic necrosis, or ischemic bone necrosis. If it isn’t treated, AVN can cause the bone to collapse. AVN most often affects your hip. Other possible sites are theshoulder,knees, andankles. In its earliest stages, AVN may have no symptoms, but as the disease progresses it typically becomes very painful.At first, it might only hurt when you put pressure on the affected bone. Then, pain may become constant. If the bone and surrounding joint collapse, you may have severe pain that makes you unable to use your joint. The time between the first symptoms and bone collapse can range from several months to more than a year. Things that can make avascular necrosis more likely include: Other conditions associated with nontraumatic AVN include: As many as 20,000 people develop AVN each year. Most are between ages 20 and 50. For healthy people, the risk of AVN is small. Most cases are the result of an underlying health problem or injury. Your doctor will start with a physical exam. They’ll press on your joints to check for tender spots. They’ll move your joints through a series of positions to check your range of motion. You might get one of these imaging tests to look for what’s causing your pain: Treatment goals for AVN are to improve the joint, stop the bone damage, and ease pain. The best treatment will depend on a number of things, like: If you catch avascular necrosis early, treatment may involve taking medications to relieve pain or limiting the use of the affected area. If your hip,knee, or ankle is affected, you may need crutches to take weight off the damaged joint. Your doctor may also recommend range-of-motion exercises to help keep the joint mobile. You can do these things to help: To lower your risk of AVN: More than half the people with this condition need surgery within 3 years of diagnosis. If a bone collapse in one of your joints, you’re more likely to have it happen in another. Your outlook depends on several things: You’re less likely to do well if: SOURCES: National Osteonecrosis Foundation: "Osteonecrosis." MedlinePlus.gov: "Osteonecrosis." Penn State Hershey Medical Center: "Avascular Necrosis." DukeHealth.org: "Free Vascularized Fibular Graft." Lupus Foundation of America: “How lupus affects the bones.” Mayo Clinic: “Avascular necrosis.” Medscape: “Avascular Necrosis Follow-up.” Things you do each day could be causing your pain. Learn what happens during and after the procedure. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.