Babesiosisis a rare and life-threatening infection of the redblood cellsthat's usually spread byticks. It's caused by tinyparasitescalled Babesia. The kind that most often affects humans is calledBabesia microti. They enter your bloodstream when you're bitten by an infected deer tick. Other ways babesiosis can spread include: Babesiosis usually happens in the warmer months.Tickscarrying the parasite have been found in: People have gotten this infection in other states, too, including: It's also been seen in Europe. Signs of babesiosis start 1 to 8 weeks after you come in contact with the parasite that causes the disease. Sometimes you won't notice any symptoms. If you do, they might include: You also can get a condition called hemolyticanemiain which your red blood cells die faster than your body can make new ones. Symptoms of this can include: Symptoms can be worse if you're elderly, no longer have your spleen, or have a health condition or takemedicationsthat weaken yourimmune system. If you notice any of these symptoms, see your doctor and be sure to tell them if you've traveled recently.Tickscan be the size of a poppy seed, so you may not know if you've been bitten by one. Your doctor will order blood tests to check for signs of infection. This includes looking for Babesia in the blood under a microscope. They may also want to do other blood tests to rule out conditions with similar symptoms, such as anaplasmosis orLyme disease, which is also caused by ticks. It's possible to haveLyme diseaseat the same time as babesiosis. If you don't have any symptoms, you probably won't need treatment. If you do, your doctor may prescribea drug called atovaquone that kills microorganisms along with the antibioticazithromycin.  Another combination they may recommend is quinine with the antibiotic clindamycin.  SOURCES: CDC: "Babesiosis," "Babesiosis FAQs," "Babesiosis Prevent & Control." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Hemolytic Anemia." New York State Department of Health: "Babesiosis." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.