The umbilical cord is the tube-like structure that carries food and oxygen from a mother to theirbabywhilepregnant. It also carries waste products away from thebabyso the mother’s body can get rid of them. After you give birth, doctors clamp and cut the cord. The cord has no nerves, so neither you nor yourbabywill feel anything. A small stump will be left on your child’s belly. It can be anywhere from a half-inch to an inch long. At first, the stump might look shiny and yellow. But as it dries out, it may turn brown or gray or even purplish or blue. It’ll shrivel and turn black before it falls off on its own. Usually, it comes off between 10 and 14 days after your baby is born, but can take as long as 21 days. Here are a few things to keep in mind until the cord comes off: If your baby has a messybowel movementand some stool gets on the cord, clean it gently with soap andwater. Check the cord often for infections. Call your doctor if you see: If your baby had a low birth weight because they were born prematurely or had another health issue, they may be more likely to have an infection, so it’s good to keep an especially close eye out for any of these signs. It’s normal to see a few drops ofbloodin your baby’s diaper. But if there’s a lot of blood as the cord separates, call your doctor right away. If the cord hasn’t come off after 3 weeks, be patient. Keep the area dry and make sure it’s not covered by your child’s diaper. If it hasn’t come off in 6 weeks, or you see signs of fever or infection, call your doctor. Once the cord is gone, continue to keep the area clean and dry. You might notice a yellow, sticky fluid that oozes out. This is normal. It sometimes happens when the cord comes off. It’s not pus, and it’s not an infection. You might also see a scab over the navel. This is normal, too. But if your baby’sstomachgets red, they run afever, or you notice a cloudy discharge, call your doctor. Sometimes, a little scar tissue may form a red mass on the belly button. This bump is called an umbilical granuloma. If you see this and it doesn’t go away in about a week, let your doctor know. They’ll apply silver nitrate to it. It’llburnthe area so the tissue dries up. But remember, the cord has no nerves, so your baby won’t feel it. At some point, you’ll probably wonder what kind of belly button your child will have. Will it be an “innie” or an “outie”? You’ll have to wait until the stump is gone to know for sure. But know that the way your baby’s navel will look has nothing to do with how the doctor cut the umbilical cord. They don’t happen often, but some health conditions are linked to the umbilical cord stump, including: Umbilical granuloma: This is a small, pinkish-red lump that doesn’t fall off when the rest of the umbilical cord does. It doesn’t hurt, and your baby’s doctor can remove it by tying it off with stitches or freezing it with liquid nitrogen. SOURCES: National Health Service in England: “What is the Umbilical Cord?” Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: “Umbilical Cord Care,” “Umbilical Hernia.” American Pregnancy Association: “Umbilical Cord Care.” Children’s Hospital Colorado, “Umbilical Cord Symptoms.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “Umbilical Cord Care.” Seattle Children’s Hospital: “Should Your Child See a Doctor? Umbilical Cord Symptoms.” Le Bonheur Children’s Hospital: “Innies vs. ‘Outies’.” Academic Journal of Epidemiology: “Risk Factors For Umbilical Cord Infection Among Newborns of Southern Nepal.” National Center for Biotechnology Information: “Omphalitis.” Mayo Clinic: “Umbilical Hernia.” Fairview.org: “Umbilical Cord Granuloma (Newborn)”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.