Group B strepis abacterial infectionbabies can catch from their mother duringchildbirthor pick up in their first few months of life. Infants who get this infection can have complications likepneumonia,meningitis, or ablood infectioncalledsepsis. This infection is preventable. If you'repregnantand tests show that you have this type of bacteria, your doctor can give youantibioticsduringlaborso you don't pass the infection to yourbaby. And if your baby does get sick, antibiotics can treat the infection. Group B strep bacteria live in theintestinesand genital tract, including thevagina. About 1 out of every 4 pregnant women carries these bacteria. It's normal to have these bacteria in your body. Usually you won't know you have them because they won't make you sick. In some cases, they can causebladderand urinary tract infections (UTIs). Group strep B bacteria aren’t dangerous to you, but if youget pregnant, they are risky for yourbaby. If you carry group B strep bacteria, yourbabycan become infected during a vaginal delivery. Not every baby who is exposed toGBSwill get infected, but a small percentage can It’s more likely if: Babies can get two types of GBS infection:Early-onsetstarts during a newborn's first week of life. Babies get this type during delivery.Late-onsetstarts a week to a few months after the baby is born. This type may be acquired in the home or in the community, and it isn't prevented by antibiotics given during delivery. Babies who get this infection may start to have symptoms in the first few days of life, or weeks to months later. You may notice that your little one has: Babies with group B strep bacteria could get serious complications like these: These conditions can be life-threatening. They can also lead to long-term problems such as:  Your OB/GYN might do aurineculture early in your pregnancy to look for group B strep bacteria. You should be tested for it between your 35th and 37th weeks of pregnancy. The doctor will take a swab from yourvaginaand rectum and send it to a lab. A “positive” result means you carry this type of bacteria. If yournewbornshows symptoms of this infection after birth, the doctor can take a sample of the baby'sbloodor spinal fluid and send it to a lab. The lab will culture the bacteria to see if group B strep bacteria grow. This process can take a few days. A chest X-ray may also help doctors diagnose the infection in babies. Even before lab results are in, intravenous antibiotic treatment may be started. Your baby might also need treatments to help with GBS symptoms, including:  Researchers are working on avaccinethat might one day protect mothers and their babies from this infection. But it’s not ready yet. If tests show that you have group B strep bacteria while pregnant, your doctor will give you antibiotics during labor to prevent you from passing the infection to your baby. Penicillinand ampicillin are two antibiotics commonly used to treat this infection. If you're allergic to penicillin, your doctor can give you a different drug. You need to take antibiotics during labor, not before. If you take them earlier in your pregnancy, the bacteria can come back. You won't need to take antibiotics if you have a C-section before your water breaks. Taking antibiotics during labor will prevent early-onset group B strep infections in your baby. But it won’t lower the odds that your baby will develop the late-onset form. So keep note of any possible symptoms in your baby, particularly in the first three months of life. SOURCES: CDC: "Group B Strep (GBS): How it Spreads and Risk Factors," "Diagnosis and Treatment," "Symptoms and Complications," "Types of Infection." Group B Strep International: "How to Help Protect Your Baby." March of Dimes: "Group B strep infection." Mayo Clinic: "Group B strep disease: Diagnosis," "Self-management," "Symptoms and causes," "Treatment." UpToDate: "Patient education: Group B streptococcus and pregnancy (Beyond the Basics)."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.