Bad breath, medically called halitosis, can result from poor dental health habits and may be a sign of other health problems. Bad breath can also be made worse by the types of foods you eat and other unhealthy lifestyle habits. You can take steps to prevent and treat halitosis, at home and with the help of your dentist or doctor. Basically, all the food eaten begins to be broken down in your mouth. Also, foods are absorbed into your bloodstream and move to the lungs, affecting the air you exhale. If you eat foods with strong odors (such as garlic or onions), brushing and flossing – even mouthwash – merely covers up the odor temporarily. The odor will not go away completely until the foods have passed through your body. Other common foods that can causebad breathinclude: Likewise, dieters who don't eat often enough can have bad breath. When your body breaks down fat, the process releases chemicals that can give your breath an unpleasant smell. If you don't brush and flossteethdaily, food particles can remain in your mouth, promoting bacterial growth between teeth, around the gums, and on the tongue. This causes bad breath. Inflammation of the gums (gingivitis) from poor dental hygiene can also cause bad breath. In addition, odor-causing bacteria and food particles can cause bad breath if dentures are not properly cleaned. Smoking or chewingtobacco-based products also can cause bad breath, stain teeth, reduce your ability to taste foods, and irritate your gums. Persistent bad breath or a bad taste in the mouth may be a warning sign of gum (periodontal) disease.Gum diseaseis caused by the buildup of plaque on teeth. Bacteria cause toxins to form, which irritate the gums. If gum disease continues untreated, it can damage the gums and jawbone. Other dental causes of bad breath include poorly fitting dental appliances,yeast infectionsof the mouth, and cavities. The medical condition dry mouth (also called xerostomia) also can cause bad breath. Saliva is necessary to moisten the mouth, neutralize acids produced by plaque, and wash away dead cells that build up on the tongue, gums, and cheeks. If not removed, these cells decompose and can cause bad breath. Dry mouth may be a side effect of various medications,salivary gland problems, or continuous breathing through the mouth. In fact, morning breath is worse for people who sleep with their mouths open. Many other diseases and illnesses can cause bad breath, including: There are some quick and easy ways to banish bad breath. Just remember, the odor from what you eat can stick around until the food works its way completely out of your system – up to 3 days later! Bad breath can be reduced or prevented if you: In most cases, your dentist can treat the cause of bad breath. If yourdentist determinesthat your mouth is healthy and the odor is not of oral origin, you may be referred to your family doctor or to a specialist to determine the odor source and treatment plan. You can go over a list of your medications with them to see if any of them could be adding to the problem. Work with them to keep diabetes, allergies, and other conditions under control. If the odor is due to gum disease, for example, your dentist can either treat the disease or refer you to aperiodontist, a dentist who specializes in treating gum conditions. Anantiseptic mouthwashcan help eliminate bacteria that cause bad breath. For dry mouth, your dentist might recommend artificial saliva. Ask your dentist about which product is best for you. SOURCES: International Dental Health Foundation: "Frequently Asked Questions: Bad Breath." WorlDental.org: "The Truth About Halitosis, Bad Breath," "Bad Breath Causes and How to Get Rid of Bad Breath." University of Maryland Medical Center: "Oral Health: Halitosis (Bad Breath)." American Dental Association: "Bad Breath (Halitosis)," "Brushing Your Teeth." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Halitosis: Overview." Academy of General Dentistry: "What is Halitosis?" "Does a Smaller Waist Mean Smelly Breath?" NutritionMD.org: "Allergic Rhinitis and Sinusitis." American Dental Hygienists Association: "Bad Breath Fact Sheet." Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.