The Bartholin’s glands are on each side of your vaginal opening. They’re about the size of a pea. They make fluid that keeps yourvaginamoist. The fluid travels to the vagina through ducts (tubes). If they get blocked, fluid can back up into them. This forms a swelling -- acyst. Doctors call these Bartholin’s gland cysts. Most of the time, they don’t hurt. They’re almost always benign, or noncancerous. You may not have any, unless thecystis large or gets infected. If infection sets in (doctors call this anabscess), you’ll likely have extreme pain at the site of the cyst.Sex-- and even walking -- may hurt. If the cyst is large, it can make one side of your labia majora (the large folds ofskinon the outside of yourvagina) hang lower than the other. Symptoms of an infected Bartholin’s cyst include:  Doctors aren’t sure why these glands sometimes get blocked. The infection that causes the cyst may result from bacteria such asE. coli.In rare cases, it may be due to bacteria that cause sexually transmitted infections (STIs) likegonorrheaorchlamydia. About two out of 10 women can expect to get a Bartholin’s gland cyst at some point. It typically happens in your 20s. They’re less likely to develop as you age. Only your doctor can tell you for sure if you have a Bartholin’s cyst. They’ll do apelvic exam. If you have drainage, they’ll take a sample and look at it under a microscope to determine if you have an STI. If you have an abscess, they’ll take a sample from it and send that to a lab. If you’re over 40, they may do abiopsy(take a sample of tissue from the cyst) to rule outvulvar cancer. That’s a disease that affects the lips that surround your vagina. If your exam shows that you have an STI, or if your cyst is infected, your doctor will prescribe an antibiotic. They may also prescribe topicalmedicationsto put on your skin. If you’re under 40 and your cyst isn’t causing problems, you probably won’t need treatment. A simplesitz bathmay help the cyst go away on its own: If the Bartholin’s cyst is causing problems -- or if it’s turned into an abscess -- you’ll need to see your doctor. They’ll treat it in one of three ways:  You can’t prevent a Bartholin’s cyst. But safer sex measures like usingcondomsmay help prevent an infection or cyst formation. Good hygiene can also help. SOURCES: Gov.UK: “Bartholin’s Cyst.” Mayo Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions: Bartholin’s Cyst.” UpToDate: “Bartholin Gland Masses: Diagnosis and Management.” Merck Manual: “Bartholin Gland Cyst.” Medscape: “Bartholin Gland Diseases.” Saint Luke’s Health System: “Taking a Sitz Bath.” Cleveland Clinic: “Bartholin Cyst.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.