Bartter syndrome is a group of similar rare conditions that affect thekidneys. It's genetic, which means it's caused by a problem with a gene. If you have it, too much salt and calcium leave your body when you pee. It also may cause low levels ofpotassiumand high levels of acid in theblood. If all these are out of balance, you can have many different health problems. There are two major forms of Bartter syndrome. Antenatal Bartter syndrome starts before birth. It can be very serious, even life threatening. Babies may not grow as they should in the womb, or they may be born too early. The other form is called classic. It usually starts in early childhood and isn't as severe as the antenatal form. But it can affect growth and cause developmental delays. Gitelman syndrome is a subtype of Bartter syndrome. It tends to happen later -- usually from age 6 through adulthood. Symptoms can be different for everyone, even for people with the same condition. Some common ones include: Antenatal Bartter syndrome may be diagnosed before birth. It can be found if there are signs the baby'skidneysaren't working right or there's too much fluid in the womb. Newborns with this form of the syndrome may pee very often and can have:  Genes carry instructions that help your body work right. Genetic diseases can happen when there's a change in the gene (called a mutation). At least five genes are linked to Bartter syndrome, and they all play an important role in how your kidneys work -- especially in your ability to take in salt. Losing too much salt through pee (salt wasting) can affect how your kidneys take in other substances, including potassium and calcium. A lack of balance in these elements can lead to serious problems:  For children with symptoms of classic Bartter syndrome, a doctor will do a thorough exam along with blood andurinetests. The antenatal form can be diagnosed before birth by testing theamniotic fluidin the womb. Genetic testing may also be done. Your child's doctor will take blood and possibly small samples of tissue so a specialist can look for mutations. Once your child is diagnosed, their care may involve a team of specialists, including pediatricians, kidney experts, and social workers. To make sure they keep a healthy balance of fluids and other important things, one or several of these may be recommended: Because there's no cure, people who have Bartter syndrome will need to take certainmedicationsor supplements for life. SOURCES: National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Bartter's Syndrome." National Institutes of Health/Genetics Home Reference: "Bartter Syndrome." Merck Manual, Consumer Version: "Bartter Syndrome and Gitelman Syndrome." Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.