Basal ganglia calcification is a very rare condition that happens whencalciumbuilds up in yourbrain, usually in the basal ganglia, the part of yourbrainthat helps control movement. Other parts of yourbraincan be affected as well. This can also be called familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification or primary familialbraincalcification, and it is also called Fahr’s disease or Fahr’s syndrome. You're most likely to get basal ganglia calcification between the ages of 30 and 60, though it can happen any time. Most people who develop it are in good health before they find out they have it. Calcification can occur in many parts of the brain and is most commonly benign with no symptoms and not associated with Fahr's disease. Basal ganglia calcification sometimes happens when you age. It can come from genes passed to you by your parents, but not always. You only need one faulty gene from one parent to get the illness. Your parents may have symptoms of it, but sometimes they don’t. Calciumbuild-up in your basal ganglia can also happen because of infection, problems with your parathyroid gland, and for other reasons. In most cases, you may have no symptoms at all. But if you do, there are usually two types: either movement-related or psychiatric. The exact symptoms depend on which part of your brain is affected. Movement symptoms: Psychiatric symptoms: Other symptoms: Your doctors usually start with symptoms and family history. If one of your brothers and sisters or a parent has it, it's more likely that your symptoms (if you have any) are part of the same syndrome. ACT scan, which combines many X-rays to make detailed pictures of parts of your body, is the most common imaging test used to detect it. But if there is calcification, they can’t always tell if it's because of the condition or something else. Imaging tests likemagnetic resonance imaging(MRI) and X-rays might also show if there’s any calcium build-up in your brain. Your doctor might do specialurineandbloodtests to help rule out other problems. Testing of your genes is also possible if other things point to the illness. If one of your parents has it, you have a 50% chance of having it as well. If the condition runs in your family, you can get your genes tested whether you have symptoms or not. Consider genetic counseling from a professional before you have any genetic test. Counselors can also help you decide whether to have testing during yourpregnancy, orprenatal testing, if you want to start a family. Prenatal testing for this disorder is available if you already know that it is present in your family. There is no cure, but there is treatment for the symptoms. For example, if you have seizures, certain anti-epileptic medicines can help. Or if you have migraines, you can take medicine to both prevent and treat them. If you are anxious or depressed, see your doctor. There are medicines to help with mood issues. If you have this condition, it’s a good idea to see your doctor or specialist every year to see if it’s changed or advanced. Sources: Saleem, S. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, 2013. National Library of Medicine: "Familial idiopathic basal ganglia calcification." Sobrido, MJ. GeneReviews, 2014. Uptodate.com: "Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of Parkinson disease." Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: "About GARD," "Primary Familial Brain Calcification." National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Stroke: "NINDS Fahr's Syndrome Information Page." Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man: Basal Ganglia Calcification, Idiopathic, 1; IBGC1." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Primary Familial Brain Calcification." Fahr Too Strong Foundation. CheckOrphan: "Rare, Orphan and Neglected Diseases." International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society. Parkinson's Disease Foundation. Dystonia Medical Research Foundation. Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.