Unfortunately for new parents, babies don't come with instruction manuals. So when it comes to even the simplest tasks, like baths and nail trimming, some parents feel confused. If you're unsure about thebaby groomingbasics, here's a handy guide to help make hygiene as easy as loving your baby. Until your baby's umbilical cord falls off, which usually happens after the first week, don't give any baths. Instead, give your baby a sponge wash, or ‘top and tail’. Circumcised boys should not be bathed until thepenishas totally healed. Here's how: Don't use any lotions on your baby, and especially avoid adult products. Once the umbilical cord stump has fallen off, you can graduate to baths. Your baby doesn't need a bath every day -- two to three times a week should be fine. Whether you bathe baby in a baby bath, the sink, or the bathtub is up to you. But considering that babies are slippery when wet, some parents feel better able to handle giving a bath in the smaller space of a baby bath or the sink. The most important thing to remember about baths is to never leave your baby unattended. Babies can slide down and quickly become submerged in even a few inches of water. Using a baby bath seat is no assurance that your baby will be safe in the bathtub. Many seats can easily tip over. If you need to leave the room, wrap your baby in a towel and take them with you. Here are tips for giving your baby a tub bath: It's common for babies to develop flaky, red patches of skin on their scalp called cradle cap. It's not a big concern and is easy to treat. Here's how: Cradle cap should get better on its own. If it sticks around or spreads to baby's face, neck, or other parts of the body, see your doctor. You may need a stronger prescription shampoo for your baby'shairand acortisonecream for your baby's body. Because your baby's fingernails grow very quickly and babies can easily scratch themselves, file or cut the nails about twice a week. Your baby'stoenailsdon't grow as quickly. You can probably get away with cutting them a couple of times a month. Just watch out for any jagged edges that you may need to trim. Whether you opt for baby scissors, a baby nail clipper, or a nail file is up to you. Considering the tiny size of baby's nails, decide which one you're most comfortable using. Filing generally runs less of a risk that you'll cut yourbaby's skin. Never bite off your baby's nails -- you could give them an infection. Here are some tips to make cutting nails easier: SOURCES: Dr Christopher Tolcher, MD, clinical assistant professor of pediatrics, USC School of Medicine; spokesman, American Academy of Pediatrics. National Safety Council: "Baby-proofing your home." March of Dimes: "Giving your baby a bath." Consumer Product Safety Commission: "CPSC warns of drowning hazard with baby bath seats or rings."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.