Whilebedwettingcan be a symptom of an underlying disease, a large majority of children who wet the bed have no underlying disease that explains theirbedwetting. In fact, an underlying condition is identified in only about 1% of children who routinely wet the bed. That does not mean that the child whowets the bedcan control it or is doing it on purpose. They are not lazy, willful, or disobedient. Bedwetting is most often a developmental issue. Most kids simply outgrow it and never need treatment. There are 2 types of bedwetting: primary and secondary. Primary means bedwetting that has been ongoing since early childhood without a break. A child with primary bedwetting has never been dry at night for any significant length of time. Secondary bedwetting is bedwetting that starts up after the child has been dry at night for a significant period of time, at least 6 months. The cause is likely due to one or a combination of the following: Secondary bedwetting can be a sign of an underlying medical or emotional problem. The child with secondary bedwetting is much more likely to have other symptoms, such as daytime wetting. Common causes of secondary bedwetting include the following: Bedwetting does tend to run in families. Many children who wet the bed have a parent who did too. Most of these children stop bedwetting on their own at about the same age their parent did. Parents should consider treatment if their child is still wetting the bed between ages 6 and 7, according to the National Enuresis Society -- or sooner if the child seems troubled by bedwetting. In addition, no matter the age, if you notice other symptoms, such as if your child has the urge to urinate more often or has a burning sensation when they pee, get medical care right away. SOURCES: eMedicineHealth: "Bedwetting Causes," "Bed-Wetting in Kids." Thiedke, C.American Family Physician, April 2003. See the variety of reasons that can causes these dreams. Get tips to help manage daytime sleepiness. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.