Biliary atresia is a rare disease of the bile ducts that affects only infants. Bile ducts are pathways that carry a digestive fluid called bile from theliverto the small intestine. Once there, it breaks down fats and absorbs vitamins. It then filters waste out of the body. With biliary atresia, these ducts swell and become blocked. Bile is trapped in theliver, where it starts to destroy cells. Over time, thelivercan be scarred -- a condition calledcirrhosis. Once this happens, it can't filter out toxins the way it should. Some babies get it in the womb. But most often, symptoms appear between 2 and 4 weeks after birth. Doctors believe a number of things may trigger biliary atresia, including: It isn't passed down from one family member to another, and babies can't catch it from someone else. Girls who are born prematurely are most at risk. So are Asian and African-American babies. If yourbabyhas biliary atresia, one of the first things you'll notice is that theirskinand the whites of theireyeslook yellow. This is calledjaundice. Jaundice is very common among infants, especially in those born before 38 weeks, but it usually goes away in 2 to 3 weeks. Jaundice caused by biliary atresia lasts longer than that. Theirabdomenalso may swell, they'll have gray or white stools, and their pee will be dark. This happens because their liver can't process bilirubin -- a reddish-brown substance that's made when redblood cellsbreak down. It's what givespoopits brown color. Some babies also might have frequentnosebleedsor intenseitching. Many liver conditions have the same symptoms as biliary atresia. To make sure they find the right cause, your child's doctor may test theirbloodfor high levels of bilirubin. They may also do some or all of the following: The most common treatment is the Kasai procedure. It's done if the blocked bile ducts are outside thebaby's liver. During the operation, yourbaby's surgeon will replace the blocked bile ducts with part of their intestine. This lets bile drain from their liver through the new "duct" and into their intestine. If it's done before yourbabyis 3 months old, the surgery has about an 80% success rate. If it's not successful, babies usually need aliver transplantwithin 1 to 2 years. If the blocked bile ducts are inside the liver,medicationmay help get rid of bile, andvitamin A, D, and Esupplementsmay be prescribed. But a liver transplant probably will be needed. If a baby has a successful Kasai procedure, they may recover and have a full, active life. But in most cases, they'll need specialized medical care for the rest of their life. Eventually, they may also need a liver transplant. SOURCES: American Liver Foundation: "Biliary Atresia." Children's Liver Disease Foundation: "Biliary Atresia." National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disorders: "Biliary Atresia."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.