When you raise your hand to wave hello to a friend, or lift yourkneeto take another step on the Stairmaster, you control these actions. Other body functions -- like heart rate,skintemperature, andblood pressure-- are controlled involuntarily by your nervous system. You don't think about making yourheartbeat faster. It just happens in response to your environment, like when you're nervous, excited, or exercising. One technique can help you gain more control over these normally involuntary functions. It's calledbiofeedback, and the therapy is used to help prevent or treat conditions, includingmigraine headaches,chronic pain,incontinence, and high blood pressure. The idea behind biofeedback is that, by harnessing the power of your mind and becoming aware of what's going on inside your body, you can gain more control over your health. Researchers aren't exactly sure how or why biofeedback works. They do know that biofeedback promotes relaxation, which can help relieve a number of conditions that are related to stress. During a biofeedback session, electrodes are attached to your skin. Finger sensors can also be used. These electrodes/sensors send signals to a monitor, which displays a sound, flash of light, or image that represents yourheartand breathing rate, blood pressure, skin temperature,sweating, or muscle activity. When you're under stress, these functions change. Your heart rate speeds up, your muscles tighten, your blood pressure rises, you start to sweat, and your breathing quickens. You can see these stress responses as they happen on the monitor, and then get immediate feedback as you try to stop them. Biofeedback sessions are typically done in a therapist's office, but there are computer programs that connect the biofeedback sensor to your own computer. A biofeedback therapist helps you practice relaxation exercises, which you fine-tune to control different body functions. For example, you might use a relaxation technique to turn down the brainwaves that activate when you have aheadache. Several different relaxation exercises are used in biofeedback therapy, including: As you slow your heart rate, lower your blood pressure, and ease muscle tension, you'll get instant feedback on the screen. Eventually, you'll learn how to control these functions on your own, without the biofeedback equipment. Different types of biofeedback are used to monitor different body functions: Electromyogram (EMG).This measures muscle activity and tension. It may be used forback pain,headaches, anxiety disorders, muscle retraining after injury, andincontinence. Thermal.This measures skin temperature. It may be used forheadacheand Raynaud's disease. Neurofeedback orelectroencephalography(EEG).This measuresbrainwaves. It may be used forattention deficit hyperactivity disorder(ADHD), epilepsy and otherseizuredisorders. Electrodermal activity (EDA).This measuressweatingand can be used for pain andanxiety. Heart rate variability (HRA).This measures heart rate. It may be used for anxiety, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), andirregular heartbeat. Each biofeedback therapy session lasts about 60-90 minutes. Usually, you can start to see biofeedback benefits within 10 sessions or less. Some conditions, such ashigh blood pressure, can take more sessions to improve. Biofeedback can help many different conditions. Here is a rundown of some biofeedback benefits: Chronic pain.By helping you identify tight muscles and then learn to relax those muscles, biofeedback may help relieve the discomfort of conditions like low back pain,abdominal pain,temporomandibular jointdisorders (TMJ), and fibromyalgia. For pain relief, biofeedback can benefit people of all ages, from children to older adults. Headaches.Headaches are one of the best-studied biofeedback uses. Muscle tension and stress can triggermigrainesand other types of headaches, and can make headache symptoms worse. There is good evidence that biofeedback therapy can relax muscles and ease stress to reduce both the frequency and severity of headaches. Biofeedback seems to be especially beneficial for headaches when it's combined with medications. Anxiety.Anxiety relief is one of the most common uses of biofeedback. Biofeedback lets you become more aware of your body's responses when you're stressed and anxious. Then you can learn how to control those responses. Urinary Incontinence.Biofeedback therapy can help people who have trouble controlling the urge to use the bathroom. Biofeedback can help women find and strengthen the pelvic floor muscles that control bladder emptying. After several sessions of biofeedback, women with incontinence may be able to reduce their urgent need to urinate and the number of accidents they have. Biofeedback can also help children who wet the bed, as well as people withfecal incontinence(the inability to controlbowel movements). Unlike drugs used to treatincontinence, biofeedback doesn't tend to cause side effects. High Blood Pressure.Evidence on the use of biofeedback forhigh blood pressurehas been mixed. Although the technique does seem to lower blood pressure slightly, biofeedback isn't as effective as medication for blood pressure control. Other biofeedback uses include:  Many different health care providers offer biofeedback therapy, including psychiatrists, psychologists, and general physicians. To find a qualified biofeedback provider in your area, contact an organization like the Association for Applied Psychophysiology & Biofeedback. SOURCES: University of Maryland Medical Center: "Biofeedback." American Headache Society: "Biofeedback and Relaxation Training for Headaches." UCSF Medical Center: "Biofeedback for Incontinence." Glick, R.M.Primary Care: Clinics in Office Practice, March 2010. Palermo, T.M.Pain, March 2010. Morone, N.E.Pain Medicine, May-June 2007. Nicholson, R.A.Current Treatment Options in Neurology, November 2010. “NIH Consensus and State-of-the-Art Science Statements,” December 2007. Wang, S.Z.Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, October 2010. Greenhalgh J.Journal of Hypertension, April 2010. Moravec, C.S.Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, March 2008. Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.