Bipolardisorder was formerly calledmanic depression. It is a form of major affective disorder, ormood disorder, defined by manic or hypomanic episodes (changes from one's normal mood accompanied by high energy states).Bipolar disorderis a serious condition.Maniaoften involves sleeplessness, sometimes for days, along withhallucinations,psychosis, grandiose delusions, or paranoid rage. In addition, depressive episodes can be more devastating and harder to treat than in people who never have manias or hypomanias. Bipolar disorderis a complex disorder that likely stems from a combination of genetic and non-genetic factors. The mood episodes associated with it involveclinical depressionor mania (extreme elation and high energy) with periods of normal mood and energy in between episodes. The severity of mood episodes can range from very mild to extreme, and they can happen gradually or suddenly within a timeframe of days to weeks. When discrete mood episodes happen four or more times per year, the process is called rapid cycling. Rapid cycling should not be confused with very frequent moment-to-moment changes in mood, which can sometimes occur in people with bipolar disorder or other conditions such asborderline personality disorder. Along with manic or depressive episodes, patients with bipolar disorder may have disturbances in thinking. They may also have distortions of perception and impairment in social functioning.  Like with other mood disorders, thecauses of bipolar disorderare not known. What is known is that bipolar disorder involves dysregulation ofbrainfunctioning and sometimes has a genetic component (it can run in families). Bipolar disorder usually appears between ages 15 and 24 and persists through a lifetime. It's rare that newly diagnosed mania is seen in young children or in adults over age 65. Severity of symptoms varies with individuals who have bipolar disorder. While some people have a few symptoms, others have many that impair their ability to work and live a normal life. Marked by relapses and remissions, bipolar disorder has a high rate of recurrence if untreated. Patients with severe mania usually require hospitalization to keep them from risky behaviors. Those who are severely depressed also might need hospitalization to keep them from acting onsuicidalthoughts or psychotic symptoms (delusions, hallucinations, disorganized thinking). About 90% of individuals with bipolar I disorder, which is the more serious form, have at least one psychiatric hospitalization. Two out of three will have two or more hospitalizations in their lifetime. The clinicaldepression symptomsseen with bipolar disorder are the same as those seen in major depressive disorder and include: The signs of mania in bipolar disorder include: While mania is the main characteristic of bipolar I disorder, bipolar II has milder periods of elation known as hypomania. It also has episodes ofmajor depression. According to theDSM-5,the diagnostic manual published by the American Psychiatric Association, the difference between mania and hypomania is "the degree of severity" as well as an absence of psychosis (delusions or hallucinations) in hypomania and no negative impact from "high" symptoms in work and social functioning. Signs of hypomania in bipolar II disorder include: As with most mood disorders, there is no laboratory test orbrainimaging method to diagnose bipolar disorder. After performing aphysical exam, your doctor will evaluate your signs and symptoms. Your doctor will also ask you about your personal medical history and family history. Lab tests may be done to rule out other medical illnesses that can affect mood. In addition, your doctor may want to talk with family members to see if they can identify times when you were elated and over-energized. Because elation may feel good or even normal when compared todepression, it's often hard for a person with bipolar disorder to know if the mood was too high. Mania often affects thinking, judgment, and social behavior in ways that cause serious problems and embarrassment. For example, unwise business or financial decisions may be made when an individual is in a manic phase. So early diagnosis and effective treatment is very important with bipolar disorder.  Treatment for bipolar disorder may include the use of mood stabilizers such aslithium. Certain anticonvulsants, antipsychotics, and benzodiazepines may also be used to stabilize mood. Sometimesantidepressantsare given in combination with mood stabilizers to boost the depressed mood, althoughantidepressantsare often not as effective as some mood stabilizers or certain atypical antipsychotics fortreating depressionin bipolar disorder. SOURCES: National Institute of Mental Health: "What is Depression?" and "What are the different forms of depression?" American Psychiatric Association:Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-V). Fieve, R.Bipolar II,Rodale Books, 2006. Differences between feeling depressed and feeling blue. Famous people who've struggled with persistent sadness. Learn the truth about this serious illness. Tips to stay the treatment course. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.