Althoughbipolar disordermore commonly develops in older teenagers and young adults, it can appear in children as young as 6. In recent years, it's become a controversial diagnosis. Some experts believe it is rare and being overdiagnosed; others think the opposite. At this point, it's hard to be sure just how common it is. Another diagnosis, called Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD) also has been established to describe children ages 6-18 who have severe and persistent irritability and temper outbursts that don't meet conventional definitions ofbipolar disorder. So it's important not to jump to conclusions. If your child is diagnosed withbipolar disorder, you might want to get a second opinion before embarking on a treatment plan. Make sure you're comfortable with your child'shealth careprovider. Diagnosing bipolar disorderin young children is difficult, because many of the symptoms are similar to those ofattention deficit hyperactivity disorder(ADHD) or conduct disorders -- or even just normal, childhood behavior. One problem is thatmedicationsused forADHDare often stimulants, which can potentially triggermaniainchildren with bipolar disorder. Young children in a manic phase might be more irritable than adults; they may be more likely to have psychotic symptoms, hearing and seeing things that aren't real. During a depressive episode, they might be more likely to complain of physical symptoms, like aches and pains. One of the most notable differences is that bipolar disorder in children cycles much more quickly. While manic and depressive periods may be separated by weeks, months, or years in adults, they can happen within a single day in children. As the parent of a child with bipolar disorder, there's a lot you can do to keep your child well. Here are some suggestions. In older teenagers, the symptoms and treatment of bipolar disorder are much more similar to those seen in adults. But having a teenager with this condition presents a lot of distinct problems. As they get older, teenagers might be resentful if they feel that you're imposing treatment on them. So let them into the conversation. Talk frankly -- along with your child's doctor or therapist -- about treatment options. Try not to develop an adversarial relationship with your child over their treatment or medication. As with adults, it's key that teenagers with bipolar disorder avoid alcohol and drugs, which can interact with medications or bring on or worsen mood episodes. The risks of developing asubstance abuseproblem are much higher in teens with bipolar disorder than in their peers. It's also important to maintain regular routines around sleep and wake times, and to develop effective coping strategies formanaging stressand distress. SOURCES:WebMD Medical Reference: "Bipolar Disorder (Manic Depressive Disorder)."WebMD Assess Plus: Bipolar Disorder Assessment.National Institute of Mental Health: "Step-BD Womens Studies."Massachusetts General Hospital Bipolar Clinic & Research Program.MedicineNet: "Bipolar Disorder (Mania)."WebMD Medical Reference: "Effects of Untreated Depression."American Psychiatric Association: "Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Patients With Bipolar Disorder." Learn how they work and common side effects. Tips to help make life with the condition a little easier. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.