The nameblack hairy tonguemay sound scary, but the condition is harmless. Black hairy tongue is caused by bacteria or fungi in the mouth, which make thetongueappear black and hairy. It's easily remedied by good old-fashioned oral hygiene. A black hairy tongue is caused by too much bacteria or yeast growth in themouth. The bacteria build up on tiny rounded projections called papillae. These lie along the surface of the tongue. Instead of shedding as they normally do, the papillae start to grow and lengthen, creatinghair-like projections. They can grow to 15 times their normal length. Normally, the papillae are pinkish-white. But as they grow, pigments from food, drinks, and possibly the bacteria or yeast themselves get caught in the papillae, dyeing the tongue a color. Most often that color is black, hence the name. But the tongue can also turn brown, yellow, green, or a variety of other colors. Certain lifestyle habits and conditions can make people more likely to develop black hairy tongue. They include: Black hairy tongue is more common in men, people who use intravenous drugs, and those who are HIV-positive. Other than the appearance of the tongue, most people with black hairy tongue don't have any symptoms or feel any discomfort. The exception is when there is too much growth of the yeastCandidaalbicans, which can cause a burning sensation on the tongue. This burning sensation is called glossopyrosis. Some people complain of a tickling feeling in the back of the roof of the mouth, ametallic tastein their mouth, ornausea. In more severe cases, the condition may lead to a gagging feeling. Sometimes, food getting caught inside the extra-long papillae can causebad breath. Practicing good oral hygiene is the best way to treat black hairy tongue. Gently brush yourteethtwice a day with a softtoothbrush. Also, brush your tongue. You can use a tongue scraper to make sure you're thoroughly cleaning the area. Drink plenty of water throughout the day to help keep your mouth clean. Other tips include: Call your doctor or dentist if the problem doesn't get better on its own. Your doctor may prescribeantibioticsor anantifungaldrug to get rid of the bacteria or yeast. Topical medications, such astretinoin(Retin-A), are also sometimes prescribed. As a last resort, if the problem doesn't improve, the papillae can be surgically clipped off with a laser or electrosurgery. SOURCES: eMedicine.com: "Hairy Tongue." Korber, A, Dissemond, J.The New England Journal of Medicine, 2006; vol. 354: p. 67. McGrath. E, Bardsley, P, Basran, G.CMAJ, 2008; vol. 178: pp. 1137-1138. Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.