When you haveanemia, your body doesn't make enough redblood cells, or the ones you do have aren’t working like they should. Redblood cellsare key because they carry oxygen to your body. Without them, you can feeltiredand short of breath. Your red blood cells are made in the spongy tissue inside your bones called marrow. Diamond-Blackfananemia, orDBA, is a type of anemia that’s caused when your bone marrow can't make enough red blood cells to meet your body’s needs. Diamond-Blackfan anemia, also known as acquired pure red cell aplasia, is usually diagnosed when a child is less than a year old. It’s caused by changes, or mutations, in their genes, which are the building blocks of DNA. Sometimes the genetic mutation is passed down from one parent to a child. But sometimes the genes change on their own. About half of DBA cases have a known genetic cause, but some people don’t know what causes their DBA. People with DBA have many of the same symptoms as other types of anemia, includingfatigue, paleskin, and weakness. Some children born with DBA also have physical effects to their face and body, such as: Other symptoms of DBA can includekidneyproblems,heartdefects, andeye problemssuch ascataractsandglaucoma. Boys can also have hypospadias, a defect that is there from birth, where the opening for their urinary tract isn’t at the tip of theirpenis. Your doctor can use several tests to find out if your child has DBA, usually before age 1. Children with DBA have a low number of red blood cells, but normal white blood cells and platelets. Your doctor will likely take a complete blood count, orCBC. It’s a blood test that looks at different parts of blood. This test measures several things, including: A few other blood tests your doctor can use to help diagnose DBA include: Reticulocyte count.This test measures the number of young red blood cells. It can tell whether your child’s bone marrow is making enough red blood cells. Erythrocyte adenosine deaminase (eADA) levels.About 80% of people with DBA have high levels of an enzyme called erythrocyte adenosine deaminase. This test measures the erythrocyte adenosine deaminase levels (eADA) in your child’s blood. Fetalhemoglobin levels.Fetal hemoglobin is the type of hemoglobin babies have while in the womb. After birth, levels of this hemoglobin should drop. Many children with DBA still have high levels of fetal hemoglobin, even as they get older. Bone marrow aspirationandbiopsy.During this test, a small amount of cells and fluid are removed from the bone marrow with a needle. A technician looks at the samples to see how many red blood cells and other cells are in the marrow, and how healthy they are. Children with DBA will have fewer than normal healthy red blood cells in their bone marrow. Genetic tests.These tests check for DBA genes, or genes for other types of anemia that are passed from parents to children. People with DBA are more likely to end up with certain diseases and conditions, includingcancerof the blood and bone marrow (acute myeloid leukemia),bone cancer(osteosarcoma), and other disorders in which the bone marrow doesn't make enough healthy blood cells (myelodysplastic syndrome). Children diagnosed with DBA are able to live long lives with medical treatment. And some go into completeremission, meaning the symptoms disappear for a time. Two common treatments areblood transfusiontherapyand corticosteroidmedication. Some people might also consider abone marrow transplant, although it is riskier. And finding a matching donor is often difficult. You should discuss all options with your doctor. Corticosteroid drugs.Medications likeprednisone(Rayos,Sterapred) can help make bone marrow produce more red blood cells. Blood transfusion.Ifsteroiddrugs don't work, or your child’s anemia becomes more severe, a blood transfusion is an option. Whole blood or red blood cells from a healthy donor can take the place of the blood cells your child’s body isn't making. Bone marrow/stem celltransplant.This treatment replaces damaged bone marrow with healthy stem cells from a donor. It is the only cure for DBA. SOURCES: Dana-Farber Cancer and Blood Disorders Center: "Diamond-Blackfan Anemia (DBA)." Diamond Blackfan Anemia Foundation, Inc.: "What is Diamond Blackfan Anemia?" Genetics Home Reference: "Diamond-Blackfan Anemia." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "What Is Anemia?" National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Anemia, Blackfan Diamond." Seattle Children's Hospital: "Diamond Blackfan Anemia Symptoms and Diagnosis." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.