Bracesare dental tools that help correct problems with yourteeth, like crowding,crooked teeth, or teeth that are out of alignment. Many people get braces when they’re teenagers, but adults get them too. As you wear them, braces slowly straighten and align your teeth so you have a normal bite. Some people get braces to adjust theirsmile. If you havecrooked teethand/or a misaligned bite (an underbite or overbite), there are a variety of treatments that can help straighten teeth, including braces and retainers, custom-made, removable or fixed tools that cover the outside of your teeth and help keep them in position. Learn more about how to tellif you have an overbite. Many general dentists do basic alignment and treat other tooth problems, but orthodontists specialize in correcting issues with your teeth. An orthodontist has 2 to 3 years of advanced orthodontic education and training beyond dental school. They specialize in straightening teeth, correcting misaligned bites, and jaw problems. Thedentistororthodontistyou choose will ask questions about your health, do a clinical exam, take a digital scan of your teeth, take photos of your face and teeth, and order X-rays of themouthand head. They’ll come up with a treatment plan based on this information. You might only need a removable retainer. If you have an extreme overbite or underbite, you could need surgery. But most people need braces. Learn more:Can your overbite returnafter you wear braces? Braces are the most popular way to straighten teeth and correctmisaligned bitesin children. They’re not the shiny mouthful of metal of years past. Many more options are now available. If braces are indeed the solution for you, the dentist or orthodontist will prescribe an appliance specific for your needs. The braces may consist of bands, wires, and other fixed or removable corrective appliances. No one method works for everyone. Braces work by putting pressure on your teeth over a period of time to slowly move them in a specific direction. Theboneunder them changes shape, too. Braces are made up of these things: Newer “mini-braces,” which are much smaller than traditional braces, may be an option for some. Another method of straightening teeth uses removable plastic retainers. This may also work if your teeth aren’t too crowded. Your orthodontist will discuss the various types of braces with you and figure out which option is best. Find more information on buyingretainers online. The time required for braces varies from person to person. It depends on: On average, once braces go on, they usually remain in place for 1 to 3 years. After braces come off, most people need to wear a retainer all the time for the first 6 months. After that, you have to wear it only while you’re asleep, but you may do it for many years. The orthodontist will want to see you about every month or so in order to make sure the braces are putting steady pressure on your teeth. They’ll adjust the wires, springs, or rubber bands to create more tension and pressure. In some cases, braces alone won’t be enough to straighten your teeth or shift your jaw. That’s when the orthodontist will suggest headgear. There may be some discomfort when braces are put on, when they are adjusted, or when you start using a new appliance, such as rubber bands or headgear. Over-the-counter pain relievers likeacetaminophenoribuprofencan help. Tell your orthodontist if you have a lot ofpainafter each adjustment. They may be able to make the adjustments a bit differently or provide special wax to cover the sharp areas on the braces. Some people are allergic to certain metals, such as nickel. When this happens, other materials can be used instead. People can also be allergic to the latex gloves used by the orthodontist and the assistants. Braces can sometimes irritate gums, causing swelling. This is not anallergic reactionbut is still something to watch for. Braces, wires, springs, rubber bands, and other appliances can attract food and plaque, which can stainteethif not brushed away. Most orthodontists recommend brushing after every meal or snack with fluoridetoothpasteand carefully removing any food that may have gotten stuck in your braces. Some orthodontists will also prescribe or recommend a fluoride mouthwash, which can get into places in the mouth that atoothbrushcan't reach. A Waterpik or AirFlosser is also sometimes helpful to flush out stuck food. To floss teeth if you have braces, feed the short end of the floss through the space between the main arch wire and the upper portion of thetoothclosest to the gum. Use a gentle sawing motion to work the floss on each side of the two teeth the floss is between. Be careful not to pull with too much force around the arch wire. Begin brushing teeth by using a regular soft toothbrush. Brush down from the top and then up from the bottom on eachtoothwith braces. Next, brush your teeth with a Proxabrush or "Christmas tree" brush. This brush is specially designed for cleaning between two braces. Insert the brush down from the top and then up from the bottom between two braces. Use several strokes in each direction before moving on to the next space between two braces. Repeat the procedure until all teeth have been cleaned. Every time you brush your teeth, brush your retainer as well, but not with toothpaste. Once a day or at least once a week, disinfect the retainer by soaking it in a denture cleanser, such as Efferdent, Polident, or other brand-name solution. Add the cleanser to a cup full of warm -- not hot -- water. Thoroughly rinse the retainer with plain water before putting it back in yourmouth. Braces are delicate. Breaking part of the appliance can result in the teeth moving in the wrong direction and in longer treatment. Avoid anything that is hard, sticky, or chewy, including:  Your dentist can tell you when to seek evaluation from an orthodontist. The American Association of Orthodontists and the American Dental Association recommend that all kids be evaluated for orthodontics by age 7. By this age, the orthodontist can spot subtle problems with jaw growth and emerging teeth. Most kids begin active treatment between ages 9 and 14. Orthodontists recommend that you correct dental problems while your child is still growing. The mechanical process used to move teeth with braces is the same at any age. That means braces can help both children and adults. The main difference is that some corrections for adults may require more than braces alone. The treatments could also take longer because adult bones are no longer growing. If you have braces, you can take part in any sport you choose. If there’s a chance you might get hit in the face, you’ll need to wear a specially designed mouthguard to protect the inside of your mouth. It’ll be made of durable plastic and designed to fit comfortably over your braces and will protect the soft tissues inside your mouth. Broken braces, loose bands, or protruding wires can cause problems but rarely require emergency treatment. But call your orthodontist to set up an office visit to fix the problem. If you have a more severe mouth or facial injury, get help right away. Here are tips to get through some of the more common problems until you are able to see your orthodontist:  Because braces and retainers brush up against the inside surface of the mouth, you may be more prone to developingcanker sores. If a canker sore develops, your orthodontist or dentist may prescribe a corticosteroid ointment or a prescription or nonprescription solution to ease the pain and irritation and help heal the sore. After your braces come off, the orthodontist will thoroughly clean your teeth. They may want to take another set of X-rays and bite impressions to check how well the braces straightened your teeth and if you’ve developed anywisdom teeth. If yourwisdom teethare beginning to come in after the braces are removed, the dentist or orthodontist may suggest you get them pulled to prevent newly straightened teeth from shifting. Your dentist or orthodontist will also fit you with a retainer, which is a very important part of post-braces care. Even though braces may have successfully straightened your teeth, they aren’t completely settled in their new position until the bones, gums, and muscles adapt to the change. Also, after long periods of time, teeth tend to shift. That’s why the time frame for wearing a retainer will vary from person to person. The price varies, depending on how much work is being done, the type of braces being used, and where you live, but you can expect traditional metal braces to cost about $5,000 (or less in rural areas). Someinsurancecarriers provide partial coverage for orthodontic treatment, so check to see what your policy covers. Most orthodontists offer payment plans and will let you make payments over the course of treatment without charging interest. Ask your orthodontist about all treatment fees and payment plans they offer before treatment begins. If your child could benefit from braces but you can't afford them, there may be other ways to cover the cost, including: Deciding to have orthodontic treatment may not be easy, but an improved smile can make a huge difference in appearance and self-esteem. SOURCES: American Dental Association. KidsHealth.org. Mayo Clinic: “Dental braces.” American Association of Orthodontists: “Braces vs. Clear Aligners,” “Myths and Facts," "All About Orthodontics," "Elastics," "Keeping Your Smile Beautiful After Orthodontic Treatment," "Getting into Gear: Orthodontic Headgear," "Temporary Anchorage Devices (TADs) for Predictable Tooth Movement," "Two-Phase Orthodontic Treatment," "When to See an Orthodontist." Dentaly.org: “Lingual Braces: Effective and Discreet Teeth Straightening.” Consumers Advocate: “Best Invisible Braces Based on In-Depth Reviews.” American Dental Association: "Braces and Orthodontics." Nemours Foundation: "Why do people need braces?" "Affording Braces." Aetna: "Orthodontics Braces and More." American Academy of Cosmetic Dentistry: "Orthodontics and Clear Aligners." Leon Aronson, DDS, MS, adjunct professor of orthodontics, Medical College of Georgia; Center for Advanced Dental Education, Saint Louis University; vice president, International College of Dentists. Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.