When you scrape yourelbow, it leaves an area of inflamedskin, or a lesion. But what are lesions in thebrain? And what causes them? How serious arebrain lesionsand how are they treated? Here is information about this confusing and unsettling health concern. A lesion is an area of tissue that has been damaged through injury or disease. So abrainlesion is an area of injury or disease within thebrain. While the definition sounds simple, understanding brain lesions can be complicated. That's because there are many types of brain lesions. They can range from small to large, from few to many, from relatively harmless to life threatening. Brain lesions can be caused by injury, infection, exposure to certain chemicals, problems with the immune system, and more. Typically, their cause is unknown. Symptoms of abrainlesion vary depending on the type, location, and size of the lesion. Symptoms common to several types of brain lesions include the following: Although they share a common definition -- injury or damage to tissue within the brain -- brain lesions vary greatly. Here are some common brain lesions. Abscesses:Brain abscesses are areas of infection, including pus and inflamed tissue. They are not common, but they are life threatening. Brain abscesses often occur after an infection, usually in a nearby area, such as an ear,sinus, or dental infection. They can also appear after injury or surgery to the skull. Read more about thecauses of abscesses. Arteriovenous malformations (AVMs):An AVM is a type of brain lesion that occurs during early development.Arteriesand veins in the brain grow in a tangle and become connected by tube-like structures called fistulae. The arteries are not as strong as normal arteries. The veins are often enlarge because of the constant flow ofblooddirectly from the arteries through the fistulae to the veins. These fragile vessels may rupture, leakingbloodinto the brain. In addition, the brain tissue may not receive enough blood to function properly. Damage to the brain may cause seizures as the first symptoms of an AVM. Cerebral infarction:Infarction refers to death of tissue. A cerebral infarction, or stroke, is a brain lesion in which a cluster of brain cells die when they don't get enough blood. Recognize thesigns and symptoms of a stroke. Cerebral palsy:This type of brain lesion occurs when a baby is still in the mother's womb, or during delivery. Cerebral palsy does not progress over time. The brain lesions affect the child's ability to move, which can also make communication and related skills difficult. However, many children with cerebral palsy have normal intellectual functioning. Read more on the symptoms and types of cerebral palsy. Multiple sclerosis(MS):With this condition, the immune system attacks and damages the nerve linings (myelin) in the brain and spinal cord. These lesions make it difficult for messages to be sent and received properly between the brain and the rest of the body. Learn more about thesymptoms of MS. Tumors:Tumors are clumps of cells that grow abnormally from normal tissue. Some tumors in the brain are noncancerous, or benign. Others are cancerous. They may start in the brain, or they may spread from elsewhere in the body (metastatic). They may grow quickly or they may remain stable. Get more information onsigns and symptoms of a brain tumor. The methods used to find and diagnose brain lesions depend on the symptoms. In many cases, CT and MRI imaging studies help pinpoint the location, size, and characteristics of the lesions. Blood and other lab tests may also be done to look for signs of infection. Treatment depends on the type of brain lesion. The goals of treatment may be to provide a cure, relieve symptoms, or improve the quality or length of life. Common approaches for treating brain lesions include the following:  Brain lesions take many forms, so diagnosing and treating them can be complex. That's why it's important to discuss individual questions about brain lesions with your doctor. Together, you can determine the best way to proceed in identifying, treating, and living with brain lesions. SOURCES: Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary: "Abscess;" "Infarct;" "Lesion;" and "Tumor." WebMD Medical Reference: "Alzheimer's Disease: The Basics." eMedicineHealth: "Multiple Sclerosis (MS) FAQs;" "The Central Nervous System and Multiple Sclerosis--Causes;" "Brain Abscess;" "Alzheimer Disease;" "Arteriovenous Malformations;" "Stroke, Ischemic;" "Cerebral Palsy;" and "Brain Metastasis." WebMD Medical Reference from Healthwise. "Adult Brain Tumors Treatment (PDQ®) - Classification)." Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.