 Brain tumorsare abnormal growths of cells in thebrain. In general, abenign tumoris less serious than a malignant tumor. But a benign tumor can still cause problems in your brain by pressing on nearby tissue. In the U.S., brain ornervous systemtumors affect about 6 of every 1,000 people. The brain is made up of many different types of cells. Metastatic brain tumors are made of cancerous cells from a tumor elsewhere in the body. The cells spread to your brain from another tumor in a process called metastasis. This is the most commontype of brain tumor. The exact cause of mostbrain canceris unknown. Genetic factors, various environmental toxins,radiationto the head, HIV, and cigarettesmokinghave all been linked to cancers of the brain. In most cases, no clear cause can be shown. Your doctor will start by asking questions and giving you aphysical examto see if you have a problem with your brain or brain stem. They might do aCT scanof your brain. This test is like an X-ray but shows more detail in three dimensions. Usually, the doctor will inject a dye into your bloodstream to highlight problems on the scan. If the doctor thinks you have a tumor, they’ll follow up with anMRIscan. You might also get routine lab tests to check for other medical problems. These include analysis of blood,electrolytes, andliver function tests. If your mental status has been a problem, they might do blood orurinetests to make suredrugsaren’t a problem. If your scans show that you havebrain cancer, the doctor will refer you to a cancer specialist called an oncologist. If there’s one in your area, you should see a specialist in brain tumors called a neuro-oncologist. The next step is to confirm that you have cancer. Doctors usually do this by taking and testing a sample of the tumor. This is called abiopsy: A doctor called a pathologist will examine the biopsy under a microscope. They specialize in diagnosing diseases by looking at cells and tissues. MRI Brain Cancer Picture: Side view section through the brain of a young girl. The white arrow shows a brain tumor that involves the brainstem.   MRI Brain Cancer Picture: Cross-section (image taken from the top of the head down) of a brain tumor in a young girl. The white arrow shows the tumor.  While brain cancer can limit where, when, and how you travel, getting away may be good for you. A trip -- whether for work, pleasure, or to go to aclinical trial-- may help you know that you can still do things that you want to do. But before you book your trip, you’ll want to check on these things. Driving.The doctor will let you know if it’s OK based on the location of your cancer and symptoms likevisiontrouble orseizures.  Flying.You should be able to fly about 3 months after you finish braincancer treatment. But check with your doctor first. Changes in pressure could causeheadachesorbrain swelling.  Treatments.If the trip might make you miss a cancer treatment, talk to your doctor about rescheduling. And get a letter from your doctor explaining your condition and treatments, especially if you have a port or medical implant and plan to go through airport security. If you’re going somewhere that English isn’t widely spoken, make a copy of the letter in that language. You may also want to wear a special medical alert bracelet if you could haveseizures. Arrange medical care ahead of time.Make a list of resources in the area that you’ll visit. Include a doctor, hospital that treats brain cancer, and urgent care center. If you need lab work while you’re away, your doctor can help you figure out where and when to have this done. During your trip To stay well and curbstresslevels while you travel: Keep your medicine with you.Checked luggage can get lost. Pack prescription meds in your carry-on bag for flights. Keep them in their original packages, which show what they are. You may also want to bring extra in case your trip home gets delayed. Avoid germs.Wash your handsor usehandsanitizer often. Protect yourskin.Usesunscreen. Many cancer treatments can make you more likely to get asunburn. Keep up your energy.Drink plenty ofwaterduring the day and carry snacks with you. Eating small meals often will help, too. Pace yourself.Travel can be tiring for anyone. In a big airport or train station, it’s OK to ask for help getting to your gate or a wheelchair. At your destination, consider what’s realistic for you to do in a day, rest when you need to, and enjoy your trip. SOURCES: eMedicineHealth: “Brain Cancer Facts.” The Brain Tumour Charity: “Travelling and brain tumours.” Cancer.net: “Traveling with cancer.” Cancer Research UK: “Brain tumours and driving,” “Changing your chemotherapy plan.” Postgraduate Medical Journal: “Foreign travel for advanced cancer patients: a guide for healthcare professionals.” Brain & Spine Foundation: “Everyday activities following a brain tumour.” CancerSupportCommunity.org: “Managing Common Side Effects.” Froedtert & Medical College of Wisconsin: “Brain & Spine Tumor FAQs.” National Comprehensive Cancer Network: “Patient and Caregiver Resources: Traveling with Cancer.” American Brain Tumor Association: “Depression and Mood Changes.” Macmillan Cancer Support: “How Cancer Can Affect Travel.” Learn about common types and how quickly each grows and spreads. What to know about side effects and long-term outlook. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.