Abrain tumoris a cluster of abnormal cells that grows out of control inyour brain. Some brain tumors are benign, which means the cells aren’tcancer. Others are malignant, meaning they’re cancer. Brain tumors are called primary tumors if they started in your brain. They’re considered secondary if they started somewhere else in your body and spread to your brain. Primary brain tumors come from cells that make up the brain andcentral nervous system. They’re named for the kind of cell in which they first form. There are more than 100 kinds of brain tumors. The most common types in adults are: Benign brain tumorsaren’t aggressive and normally don’t spread to surrounding tissues, although they can be serious and even life-threatening. Benign brain tumors usually have clearly defined borders and usually aren’t deeply rooted in brain tissue. This makes them easier to surgically remove if they’re in an area of the brain where it’s safe to operate. But they can come back.Benign tumorsare less likely to come back than cancerous ones. Even a benign brain tumor can be a serious health problem. Brain tumors can damage the cells around them by causinginflammationand putting increased pressure on nearby tissue, as well as inside your skull. Malignant primary brain tumorsare cancers that start in your brain, typically grow faster than benign tumors, and quickly invade surrounding tissue. Althoughbrain cancerrarely spreads to other organs, it can spread to other parts of your brain and central nervous system. Secondary brain tumorsare cancer. They come from cancer that started somewhere else in your body and spread, or metastasized, to your brain. About 1 in 4 people with cancer develop a secondary brain tumor. Symptoms of brain tumors vary according to the type of tumor and the location. Because different areas of the brain control different functions of the body, where the tumor lies affects the symptoms you get. Some tumors have no symptoms until they’re large and then cause a serious, rapid decline in health. Other tumors may have symptoms that develop slowly. Common symptoms include: These symptoms can result from many conditions. Don't assume you have a brain tumor just because you have some of the symptoms. Check with your doctor. Most of the time, doctors can’t tell what causes a brain tumor. There are only a few known risk factors for brain tumors in adults. To diagnose a brain tumor, your doctor will start by asking questions about your symptoms, overall health, and family health history. Then they’ll do aphysical exam, including a neurological exam. If there's reason to suspect a brain tumor, the doctor may request one or more of the following tests: The doctor may also ask for abiopsyto see if the tumor is cancer. They’ll remove a tissue sample from your brain. They might do it during surgery to remove the tumor. Or they could insert a needle through a small hole drilled into your skull. They’ll send the sample to a lab for testing. Your doctor will consider several things in deciding how to treat your brain tumor, including: Surgery to remove the tumor is typically the first option once a brain tumor has been diagnosed. But some tumors can't be surgically removed because of their location in the brain. In those cases,chemotherapyand radiation therapy may be options for killing and shrinking the tumor. Sometimes you’ll get chemotherapy or radiation after surgery to kill any remaining cancer cells. Your doctor may treat tumors that are deep in the brain or in areas that are difficult to reach with gamma knife therapy, a form of highly focused radiation therapy. Because treatment for cancer can damage healthy tissue, you should talk about possible long-term effects of whatever treatment is being used with your doctor. They can explain the risk and the possibility of losing certain faculties. The doctor can also explain the importance of planning for rehabilitation following treatment. Rehabilitation could involve working with several different therapists, such as: If you were recently diagnosed with a brain tumor, ask your doctor these questions at your next visit. 1. Whattype of brain tumordo I have, and what is its grade? 2. What are the symptoms ofbrain cancer? 3. Which part of my brain is affected by the tumor and what does this region of the brain do? 4. Will it be possible to surgically remove my tumor? 5. If you can't surgically remove the tumor, will I need other treatments such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy after surgery? 6. What are the possible side effects of these therapies? 7. Who might my treatment team include, and for how long will I continue to see them? 8. Are there alternative treatments for my condition? 9. Will there be any lasting problems from this disease or its treatment? 10. Are there any support groups in the area that I can contact? SOURCES: MedlinePlus Encyclopedia: "Brain tumor - primary - adults." National Cancer Institute: "National Cancer Institute Brain Tumor Study in Adults: Fact Sheet." National Cancer Institute: "What You Need to Know About Brain Tumors." National Cancer Institute: "General Information About Brain Tumors." American Brain Tumor Association: "Symptoms." National Cancer Institute: "Adult Brain Tumors Treatment." National Brain Tumor Society: "Quick Brain Tumor Facts." "Brain Tumor Education." American Brain Tumor Association. Learn about common types and how quickly each grows and spreads. What to know about side effects and long-term outlook. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.