Even though men don't havebreastslike women’s, they have a small amount of breast tissue. The "breasts" of a man are similar to the breasts of a girl beforepuberty. Girls’ tissue grows and develops, but men’s doesn't. But because they still have breast tissue, men can getbreast cancer. Men get the same types of breast cancers that women do, but cancers involving the parts that make and store milk are rare. The risk of a man getting breast cancer in his lifetime is about 1 per 1,000. Doctors used to think thatbreast cancerin men was more severe than it was in women, but it now seems that it's about the same. The major problem is that breast cancer in men is often diagnosed later than breast cancer in women. This may be because men are less likely to be suspicious of something strange in that area. It's rare for a man under age 35 to get breastcancer. Your chance of getting breast cancer goes up with age. Most breast cancers in men happen between ages 60 and 70. Other things that raise the odds for male breast cancer include:  Symptoms of breast cancerin men are similar to those in women. Most male breast cancers are diagnosed when a man finds a lump on his chest. But men tend to delay going to the doctor until they have more severe symptoms, like bleeding from the nipple. By that point, the cancer may have spread. The same techniques that are used to diagnose breast cancer in women are used in men: physical exams,mammography, andbiopsies(looking at small samples of tissue under a microscope). Treatments for men and women are generally the same. Many men benefit from a combination of treatments, such as: Remember, like anyone who has breast cancer or who has recovered from it, you'll need to have checkups with your doctor for the rest of your life. Getting regular medical care is key to staying healthy. SOURCES: National Cancer Institute. American Cancer Society. Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania. American Cancer Society: "Male Breast Cancer," "What are the key statistics about breast cancer in men?" National Cancer Institute: "Male Breast Cancer PDQ Treatment: Patient Version," "Male Breast Cancer PDQ Treatment: Health Professional Version." The Cleveland Clinic: "Breast Cancer Basics: Breast Cancer in Men." UpToDate. Things your doctor considers when making a recommendation. What to know about today's surgical procedures. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.