The soonerbreast cancergets diagnosed, the better your odds of getting successful treatment. That's why it’s important to get mammograms as recommended, to be familiar with how yourbreastsusually look, and to report any changes to your doctor ASAP. Why?  It's a good idea to know how your breasts normally look and feel so you can notice any changes. Medical organizations have different recommendations for breast self-exams, though. The American Cancer Society, for example, states that research has not shown a clear benefit of doing regular breast self-exams. Talk with your doctor to get a better sense of what's right for you. Learn more abouthow to do a breast self-exam. A clinical breast exam is done by your doctor, to feel for lumps or other changes. It’s part of your regular checkup. Your doctor will feel both breasts, one at a time. They’ll also check the underarm and collarbone areas. If they notice suspicious lumps, they may say you should get other tests. Your doctor will also examine the breasts visually for anyrashesor anything else that looks unusual. And they may lightly squeeze your nipples to see if any fluid comes out. A mammogram is an X-ray of the breast. It can show breast lumps up to 2 years before they can be felt. Different tests help determine if a lump may becancer. Ones that aren’t cancerous tend to have different physical features than ones that are.Imaging testssuch as mammograms and ultrasounds can often see the difference. Screening mammograms are those that are looking at your breasts when you don’t have a specific lump or other concern. Diagnostic mammograms focus on a specific area or areas that you or your doctor is concerned about, such as where you have a suspicious lump, breast pain, discharge from a nipple, changes in size or shape of the breasts, or certainskinchanges on the breast. When and if you need screening mammograms is a personal decision between you and your doctor. Most women don’t start having screening mammograms until they’re at least 40. If you’re at higher risk for breast cancer, your doctor may want you to start at a younger age. Read abouthow digital mammograms can give a clearer picture. This test combines several images of your breast into one to create a detailed picture. It’s more often used after you’re diagnosed to see how far cancer has spread, but your doctor might combine it with a mammogram as a screening test if: Know more aboutMRI to diagnose breast cancer. Your doctor is most likely to use this if you have dense breasts. It’s also an option if you’re at high risk for breast cancer and you can’t have anMRIor if you’repregnantso you aren’t exposed to X-rays from a mammogram. Get more details onwhat happens during a breast ultrasound. For women at average risk, the American Cancer Society recommends that women ages: The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening mammograms every other year for women ages 50-74. The decision to get a mammogram every other year from age 40 to 49 is up to you and your doctor. The only way to confirm cancer is for a doctor to do a needle aspiration or surgical breastbiopsyto collect and test tissue for cancer cells. Find outwhat to expect with a breast biopsy. If you’re diagnosed with breast cancer, you and your doctor will need to know what type it is and how advanced it is. A check of yourlymph nodescan tell if the disease has spread. Other tests give an idea of what treatments may work best for you, and still others predict how likely it is that your cancer will come back after treatment. Your doctor can help you understand all of these tests, and together you’ll decide on the best treatment plan for you. Get more information onwhat to do after a breast cancer diagnosis. SOURCES: Breastcancer.org. National Cancer Institute. Journal of the American Medical Association. Cleveland Clinic: “General Cancer Screening Guidelines.” BreastCancer.org: “U.S. Breast Cancer Statistics.” JAMA Network: “Breast Cancer Screening for Women at Average Risk: 2015 Guideline Update From the American Cancer Society.” U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: “Breast Cancer: Screening.” Mayo Clinic: “Breast MRI.” Radiological Society of North America: “Breast Cancer Screening.” CDC: “What Is Breast Cancer Screening?” National Breast Cancer Foundation: “Clinical Breast Exam,” “Diagnostic Mammogram.” Things your doctor considers when making a recommendation. What to know about today's surgical procedures. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.