It doesn’t happen often, but sometimes mothers-to-be havebreast cancer.Getting pregnantdoesn't cause thecancer, although the changes in hormones from thepregnancycan make the disease grow faster. Yourbreaststhicken while you're expecting, and that can make it hard to spot small masses or lumps. Because of this,breast cancertumors are often larger and more advanced by the time they’re noticed. This makes it extra important to have breast exams throughout pregnancy. Any lumps or suspicious symptoms need to be checked by a doctor. The best thing you can do while pregnant is to see your doctor regularly. These visits are called prenatal (or "before birth") checkups, and they're crucial for keeping you and yourbabyin the best possible health. During some of these visits, you may have breast exams to check for changes.  A mammogram is considered fairly safe during pregnancy, but it may not be as helpful because of the increased density of the breasts. A three-dimensional mammogram may be a better option.  If a suspicious lump is found, your doctor should do abiopsy. They'll remove a small sample of the suspicious tissue with a needle or by making a small cut. The sample tissue gets checked under a microscope and with other methods to look for any cancer cells.  Your doctor might also give you anultrasoundto assess the extent of any disease and to guide the biopsy. Ending a pregnancy won’t improve a woman's chances of beating breast cancer. Also, there's no evidence that the cancer harms thebaby. But the treatments have risks. Surgery, in general, is safe during any trimester of pregnancy. If the cancer is still in its early stages, your doctor will most likely recommend removing either the suspicious lump (lumpectomy) or the entire breast (mastectomy). If you're in the first orsecond trimester, a mastectomy is the preferred surgery. Lumpectomy is usually an option for women diagnosed in thethird trimester.Radiation therapyusually doesn’t start until after pregnancy because it can harm thebaby. During breast cancer surgery, the surgeon will examine thelymph nodesto see whether any are affected. They'll often remove the ones where the cancer is most likely to have spread. If you need chemotherapy, your doctor will usually wait until after thefirst trimesterto lessen the chance that it will harm the baby. Advanced breast cancerusually requires both surgery andchemotherapy, so the risk for the baby is higher. The decision of whether or not to undergo treatment can be a very hard one. Talk with your family and doctor about what's right for you. There’s no evidence that stopping your flow of breast milk will improve your cancer. It’s often okay tobreastfeedwhen you have this disease, but talk with your doctor or a lactation counselor to see what's best for you and your baby. If you're getting chemotherapy, you likely shouldn’tbreastfeed. Many powerful chemodrugscan travel through your milk to the baby. SOURCE:The American Cancer Society.The National Cancer Institute.The Journal of the American Medical Assocation. Things your doctor considers when making a recommendation. What to know about today's surgical procedures. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.