Brittle bone disease is a lifelong genetic disorder that causes your bones to break very easily, usually without any type of injury, as from a fall. Your doctor may also call it osteogenesis imperfecta. It affects both sexes and all races equally. There is no cure for brittle bone disease, but your doctor can treat it. Brittle bone disease is passed down through families, or inherited. It’s caused by a defect in a gene that is supposed to make a substance calledcollagen.Collagenis aproteinin your body that forms and strengthens bones. If you don’t have enough of it, your bones become very weak and will break easily. Most children with brittle bone disease get this gene from only one parent, but it’s possible to get it from both. Sometimes a child doesn’t inherit the gene from either parent, but the gene mutation develops on its own. The main symptom of brittle bone disease is broken bones. They break very easily. Your child may have a bone break during adiaperchange, or even when being burped. Someone with the condition may have only a few broken bones in a lifetime, or may have hundreds of them. Sometimes, babies are born withfracturesor get them while growing in their mother’s womb. Other times, symptoms don’t appear until the teen years or later. General symptoms of brittle bone disease may be mild or very severe. They include: Doctors group brittle bone disease into types, based on symptoms and number of fractures.The most common types of brittle bone disease are: Mild Moderate to severe Lethal  If yourbabyis born with broken bones, the doctor can diagnose the condition with aphysical exam. Your doctor will examine your child and ask questions about your family and medical history. Bloodandurinetests will rule out other health conditions that can cause weak bones, such asrickets. Genetic testingcan confirm brittle bone disease. Genetic tests can also tell if you or your family members carry the gene. There is no cure for brittle bone disease, but treatment can relieve symptoms, prevent breakage of bones, and maximize movement. Severe forms of the disease can affect the shape of the rib cage and spine, which can lead to life-threatening breathing problems. Some people may need to be on oxygen. But in many other cases, people with this condition live a healthy, productive life with monitoring on a regular basis and the right treatment. That treatment may include: Other things that could be helpful: SOURCES: Texas Children’s Hospital: “Brittle Bone Disease.” Osteogenesis Imperfecta Foundation: “Facts about Osteogenesis Imperfecta.” Genetics Home Reference: “Osteogenesis Imperfecta.” National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: “What Is Osteogenesis Imperfecta? Fast Facts: An Easy-to-Read Series of Publications for the Public.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.