Brucellosisis an infectious disease caused by a type of bacteria calledBrucella. The bacteria can spread from animals to humans. There are several different strains ofBrucellabacteria. Some types are seen in cows. Others occur in dogs, pigs, sheep, goats, and camels. Recently, scientists have seen new strains in the red fox and certain marine animals, including seals.Brucellain animals cannot be cured. Brucellosis is rare in the U.S. because of effective animal disease control programs. Fewer than 200 people get sick with the disease each year in the U.S. It is most often seen in the spring and summer months in: Brucellosis is considered a significant health threat in other parts of the world. The disease has been reported in more than a half-million people each year in 100 countries, according to the World Health Organization. Brucellosis in humans occurs when a person comes into contact with an animal or animal product infected with theBrucellabacteria. Very rarely, the bacteria may spread from person to person.Breastfeedingmoms with brucellosis may pass the bacteria to their baby.Brucellamay also be spread through sexual contact. The bacteria can enter your body: Four types ofBrucellabacteria cause the majority of brucellosis infections in humans: B. melitensis.This type causes most cases of human brucellosis and is mainly found in sheep and goats. It is most often seen in: B. suis.This infection found in wild pigs is the most common type ofBrucellaseen in the U.S. Brucellosis due to this strain most often occurs in the Southeast and California. It also occurs in Europe, South America, and Southeast Asia. B. canis.The infection from this type of bacteria spreads from dogs. It is most often seen in: B. abortus.This infection comes from cattle. It occurs worldwide. It has beenwiped outin several European countries, Japan, Israel, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. Dogs can become infected withB. canis. Some pet owners have developed brucellosis this way but the disease is usually mild. There is at least one known case of brucellosis spreading to a human by adog bite. But spreading brucellosis this way is uncommon. Most dogs infected withBrucellado NOT spread the bacteria to their owners. You are more likely to get brucellosis from an infected dog if you come in contact withbloodor other fluids from the animal. Veterinarians have an increased risk of brucellosis. If you have a weakened immune system due tomedicationsor certain diseases, you should not touch dogs that are infected withBrucella. In the U.S., brucellosis is more common in men. Men who become sick with the disease most often work or have worked around livestock. Brucellosis is uncommon in children. You are more likely to get brucellosis if you: Brucellosis has also been reported in: General symptoms of brucellosis are often vague and similar to the flu. They may include: Symptoms usually appear within five to 30 days after you come in contact with the bacteria. How bad your symptoms are depends on what type ofBrucellais making you sick: Your doctor will examine you. You may have: Bloodtests will be done to diagnose the infection and determine what type ofBrucellais making you sick. Proper identification of the bacteria helps pinpoint the source of the infection. Brucellosis can be difficult to treat. If you have brucellosis, your doctor will prescribeantibiotics.Antibioticscommonly used to treat brucellosis include: You will generally be givendoxycyclineand rifampin a in combination for 6-8 weeks. You must take the antibiotics for many weeks to prevent the disease from returning.  The rate of relapse following treatment is about 5-15% and usually occurs within the first six months after treatment. Recovery can take weeks, even months. Patients who receive treatment within one month of the start of symptomscan be cured of the disease. Severe brucellosis may cause: Brucellosis can cause long-lasting symptoms that are similar to systemic exertion intolerance disease. SEID is formerly known as Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. The symptoms can lead to disability. They may include: Brucellosis in a pregnant woman may lead to: Death from brucellosis is uncommon. Most brucellosis-related deaths are due to endocarditis. Brucellosis may be prevented with the following steps: If you have come in contact with an animal infected withBrucella, tell your health care provider -- even if you do not have symptoms. You will need to be monitored for at least six months. There is no effective humanvaccineto prevent brucellosis. SOURCES: CDC web site: "Brucellosis." New York Department of Health web site: "Brucellosis." World Health Organization web site: "Brucellosis." Goldman, L., Schafer, A.I., eds.,Cecil Medicine, 24th edition, Saunders Elsevier, 2011. Longo, D.L., Fauci, A.S., Kasper, D.L., Hauser, S.L., Jameson, J.L., Loscalzo, J., eds.,Harrison's Principles of Internal Medicine, 18th edition, McGraw-Hill, 2012. Auerbach, P.S., ed.,Wilderness Medicine, 6th edition, Mosby Elsevier, 2011. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.