A burning sensation in your feet may be caused bynerve damagein the legs, also called neuropathy. Although many medical conditions can causeburning feet,diabetesis the most common. Most burning feet treatments focus on preventing furthernerve damageand reducing pain. See More:What Your Feet Say About Your Health Most often, neuropathy is the cause of burning feet. Damaged nerve fibers are more likely to become overactive and misfire. The damaged nerves send pain signals to thebraineven though there is no wound. In most people with neuropathy, the leg nerves become damaged first. These people often have tingling and numbness in the feet as well. Many people complain that their feet are overly sensitive to touch (hyperesthesia) and can have varying degrees of burning pain. It can range from mild to disabling. Diabetes and alcoholabuse are by far the most common causes of neuropathy in the legs. Many other conditions can cause neuropathy or a burning sensation in the feet:  Besides neuropathy, infections andinflammationof the feet can also cause a burning sensation. The most common of these isathlete's foot, an infection of theskincaused by fungus. Peripheral artery disease(PAD) also commonly causes burning feet. The poor circulation ofbloodto the feet may frequentlycause pain, tingling, and burning feet, especially while walking. Weeks or months aftergastric bypass surgery, some people experience a burning feet sensation. Poor absorption of Bvitaminsaftergastric bypasscan cause neuropathy in the legs and a sensation of burning feet. Most people who have burning feet have a likely cause (such asdiabetes) that can be identified. For these people, the diagnosis of burning feet due to neuropathy is straightforward, and additional testing is not needed. In a few people whose burning sensation is sudden, rapidly worsening, or has no explainable cause, further testing may be needed to make a correct diagnosis. These tests may include: The most important treatment for burning feet due to neuropathy is to stop any ongoingnerve damage. In some cases treatment of the underlying disease will improve the neuropathy and symptoms. In other situations, like a small fiber neuropathy, where no cause can be identified, the physician will focus on treating the person’s symptoms. For people withdiabetic neuropathy, treatment means keepingblood sugar levelsin the normal range. This usually requires dietary changes, oralmedications, and ofteninsulininjections. For people with other forms of neuropathy that cause burning feet, preventing further nerve damage is equally important. Specific conditions and their treatments include: Burning feet treatments include treating the pain and abnormal sensations created by neuropathy. Some commonly prescribed medications for burning feet include: Other pain medications may be necessary to reduce the severe discomfort some people experience from burning feet. Over-the-counter medicines likeAdvil,Aleve,MotrinIB, andTylenolcontrol pain in many people with burning feet. Prescription pain relievers liketramadol(Ultram) or low-dose opiates (narcotics) may be necessary for severe pain. For burning feet caused by athlete's foot,antifungaldrugs can cure the fungal infection and relieve burning feet symptoms. Over-the-counter medicines likemiconazole(Micatin) orterbinafine(LamisilAT) should be used first. Prescription antifungals likefluconazole(Diflucan),itraconazole(Sporanox), and naftifine (Naftin) are also available. SOURCES: Aminoff, M.Neurology and General Medicine,Elsevier, 2008.Dobbs, M.Clinical Neurotoxicology,Saunders, 2009.  See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.