Burning mouth syndrome is the name for burningpainin your mouth that doesn’t have a known cause. Most often, the pain is on the tip of yourtongueor roof of yourmouth. But sometimes it's in the front of yourmouthor on the inner part of your lips. It often lasts for many years. About a third of people who have burning mouth syndrome say it started after some kind of dental work, an illness, or a course of medication. But most can't link it to any unusual event. If you have burning mouth syndrome, your mouth can feel like you just drank hot coffee or had some hot soup. It feels different for each person. In general, burning mouth syndrome symptoms can include: The pain may get worse throughout the day. If the burning doesn't go away or gets worse, see your dentist or doctor. Burning mouth syndrome is grouped as primary or secondary, depending on the cause. Primary burning mouth syndrome The burning pain can’t be explained by a lab test or other health condition. You might also hear primary burning mouth syndrome called idiopathic burning mouth syndrome. Doctors think the cause could be damage to nerves that control taste or pain. Secondary burning mouth syndrome Sometimes, burning mouth syndrome results from another health event or condition. In this case, it’s called secondary burning mouth syndrome. Causes of secondary burning mouth syndrome include: Burning mouth syndrome is more common in women than men. You might be more likely to get it if you’re: Your doctor will want to know about your symptoms and when they began. They'll also ask if you haveallergies, take anymedications, or smoke or drink often. The doctor will examine your mouth and check for infection. You may need several tests to rule out other medical issues. These include: If the doctor finds a health problem or other cause for your burning mouth, you have secondary burning mouth syndrome. They’ll treat the issue, and your symptoms should get better. If not, there's no known cure for burning mouth syndrome, but there are ways to ease and control your symptoms. Depending on the cause of your burning mouth syndrome, the doctor may suggest one or more of these treatments: You can do a few things that may help your symptoms as well: Burning mouth syndrome is a chronic pain condition and can affect your quality of life. It may take many doctor visits to diagnose the condition. The pain may last for months, even years. Some people have pain every day. The pain may make you feel depressed, stressed, or anxious, making it hard to do everyday activities and sleep. Any type of chronic pain can lead to anxiety which is known to cause sleeping problems. SOURCES:  American Academy of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology: "Burning Mouth/Burning Syndrome." Journal of the American Dental Association: "Burning Mouth Syndrome." Mayo Clinic: "Burning mouth syndrome." National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research. Oral Health Foundation: "Burning Mouth Syndrome." Pain Management Research Institute: "Burning Mouth/Tongue Syndrome (Glossodynia/Glossopyrosis)." Yount, K.Practical Pain Management, published online February 26, 2013. American Dental Association: “Burning mouth syndrome.” National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial research: “Burning mouth syndrome.” Avicenna Journal of Dental Research: Burning Mouth Syndrome and Its Related Risk Factors in Females. General Dentistry: “Burning mouth syndrome: a review of etiology, diagnosis, and management.” BMC Oral Health: “Psychological problems and quality of life of patients with oral mucosal diseases: a preliminary study in Chinese population.” BMJ Clinical Evidence: “Burning mouth syndrome.” Journal of Pain Management and Medicine: “Chronic Orofacial Pain: Burning Mouth Syndrome and Other Neuropathic Disorders.” Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.