Small intestinecanceris a rare disease where cells in the tissue of the small intestine change. They grow out of control and can form a mass, or tumor. The small intestine (also called “small bowel”) connects yourstomachto your large intestine. Its main job is to break down and absorb food, fats,vitamins, and other substances your body needs. If you have this type ofcancer, tumor cells may block the small intestine. There are five types of small intestinecancer: Doctors aren’t really sure why people develop it. But they do know that several things can increase your chances of getting the disease: See your doctor if you notice any of the following signs, which could be caused by small intestine cancer or something else: Your doctor will do a thorough medical exam. They’ll ask about your medical history and any problems you may be having. They’ll likely order imaging tests. These create pictures of your small bowel so they can see if there’s cancer and whether it has spread. Tests might include X-rays, aCT scan, orMRI. They might also order anendoscopy. That’s a procedure where your doctor looks at the inside of youresophagus, stomach, and first part of your small intestine. To do this, they’ll use an endoscope -- a thin, tubelike instrument that has a light and camera at the end of it. You’ll be givenmedicationto sedate you for the procedure. Other tests your doctor might order include the following: Which treatment your doctor recommends will depend on a number of things, like what type of cancer it is and whether it has spread. Surgery is the most common treatment. Your surgeon may remove the part of the small intestine that contains cancer. Or they may do “bypass” surgery so that food can go around a tumor that can’t be removed. Even if your doctor takes out all of the cancer during surgery, they may still suggestradiation therapy. This uses high-energy X-rays to kill cancer cells. They might also offerchemotherapy(chemo). These are drugs you take by mouth or through an IV tube. They, too, kill cancer cells or stop them from growing. A number of new therapies are being tested, as well. Talk to your doctor if you’re interested in taking part in one of theseclinical trialsbefore, during, or after your treatment. SOURCES: American Cancer Society: “Small Intestine Cancer.” Mayo Clinic: “Small Intestine Cancer: What Is Small Intestine Cancer?” Medical University of South Carolina: “Intestinal Lymphoma.” Cleveland Clinic: “Small Intestine Cancer.” Merck Manuals: Overview of Immunodeficiency Disorders.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.