You may know that whiteblood cellsare your body’s infection fighters. But if your body makes too much of a type of immune cell called histiocytes, they can cause tumors, lesions, and other tissue damage. One of these rare disorders -- which resembles some types ofcancer-- is called Langerhans cell histiocytosis, or LCH. It most commonly appears intoddlersand very young children, but you can have it as an adult, too. LCH can show up on many places on your body, but most often on yourskinand bones. It can affect any organ, including yourlungs,liver,brain,spleen, orlymph nodes. In about 8 out of 10 people, LCH leads to tumors called granulomas in the skull and in other bones. That cancause painand swelling, and sometimes it can fracture your arms or legs. LCH symptoms can range from mild to more serious. Some people are born with it, and the disease eventually goes away on its own. But others have a severe and long-lasting type that affects multiple parts of the body. Along with your bones, it can affect your: Skin.Red, scaly bumps in skin folds are common. Infants with LCH can get red, scaly scalps, which is often mistaken forcradle cap, a common skin condition. Liver.Usually, only severe cases of LCH affect the liver. Your skin might appear jaundiced, or yellow, and your blood can take longer to clot. Lymph nodes.These glands, which are behind theears, in the neck, and in other places, can swell up. You also might havetrouble breathingor havecoughs. Your doctor will know if you have LCH after a tissuebiopsy. That’s when a specialist called a pathologist views the sample under a microscope for specific proteins and other markers of the disease. In addition to thephysical exam, your doctors may order other tests based on your symptoms:  We don’t know all the reasons why some people get LCH. About half of the people with the disorder have a faulty gene that makes the Langerhans immune cells grow out of control. That genetic mutation happens after birth, which means you usually won’t get LCH from your parents. Researchers suspect that other things may also play a role:  As with some types ofcancer, doctors sometimes treat LCH withchemotherapy. Many people with the disorder get care fromcancerspecialists like oncologists and haematologists. But unlike most cancers, limited forms of LCH sometimes spontaneously go away on their own. Beside chemotherapy, options for treatment include: A great majority of people with LCH recover with treatment. If the disease is in your spleen, liver, or bone marrow, it’s called a high-risk LCH. About 80% of people with that type survive. SOURCES: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: “Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center -- Langerhans cell histiocytosis.” St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital: “Langerhans cell histiocytosis.” National Institutes of Health: “Langerhans cell histiocytosis.” Histiocytosis Association: “LCH in Children,” “LCH in Adults.” National Cancer Institute: “Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis Treatment (PDQ®) – Patient Version.” Macmillan (UK): “Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) in children.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.