You're more likely to havefoot problemswith diabetes because it can damage your nerves and lessenbloodflow to your feet. The American Diabetes Association estimates that it's the reason 1 in 5 people with diabetes who seek hospital care do so. One of the best things you can do for your feet is to keep your blood sugar levels under control. Small cuts or sores don't heal as well, and they can take longer to recover. If yourblood sugarisn't well-controlled, you can also have poor or no feeling in your feet. You might not even realize you have a minor injury.Diabetescan also dry theskinon your feet and make your heels crack. The big risk is infection. Germs orfunguscan get into small cuts or cracks. You have to take care of your feet when you have diabetes. If you think you've gotten an infection, tell your doctor right away. Early treatment can keep it from spreading. And that makes you more likely to avoid bigger problems. Poor foot care may lead toamputationof a foot or leg. Your doctor will check yours each year for problems. If you take good care of your feet, you can prevent many serious problems related to diabetes. Keep your feet clean. But don’t soak them for a long time. This can dry your skin. Use mild soaps and warm water. Pat yourskindry; do not rub. Thoroughly dry your feet. After washing, put lotion or petroleum jelly on them to prevent cracking. But not between your toes -- this can lead to an infection! Sprinkle on a nonmedicated powder before putting on your socks and shoes to help keep your feet dry. In winter, cold weather and central heating can dry out your skin. Take extra care to moisturize your feet and keep them warm. Wear socks to bed if your feet get cold. Look carefully at the tops and bottoms of your feet. Use a mirror or have someone else do it if you can't see them. If you get ablisteror sore from your shoes, don't "pop" it. Put a bandage over it, and wear a different pair of shoes. Cuttoenailsafter bathing, when they are soft. Trim them straight across, then smooth with a nail file. Avoid cutting into the corners of toes. Don't let the corners of your toenails grow into the skin. This could lead to aningrown toenail. You may want a nail technician or podiatrist (foot doctor) to do it for you. If you getpedicuresat a nail salon, bring your own nail tools. Don't cut cuticles. Don’t use anything sharp to clean under your toenails or to remove calluses. You don’t want to accidentally get a cut that could let an infection set in. You can use a pumice stone to gently smooth your heels after taking a shower or bath. Don't rub too harshly. Exerciseregularly to keep yourbloodflow healthy. Aim to move your body for at least 30 minutes a day. Walk and work out in comfortable shoes. Don'texercisewhen you have open sores on your feet. Ask your doctor what type of activity is best for you. Never go barefoot or only in socks. You don’t want to step on rocks, tacks, or small pieces of glass that could cut your feet. Always protect your feet with shoes, hard-soled slippers, or similar footwear. Wear shoes/boots that will protect your feet from weather conditions like cold and moisture. Wear slippers at home. Don't wear shoes with high heels and pointed toes. Avoid shoes that leave your toes or heels unprotected, like open-toed shoes, flip-flops, or sandals. They leave you vulnerable for injury and infections. Change your socks daily. Wear natural-fibers: cotton, wool, or a cotton-wool blend. Don’t use socks with seams that might rub against your skin and causeblisters. Avoid tight socks. Try on new footwear with the type of socks you usually wear. Don't wear new shoes for more than an hour at a time. Look and feel inside your shoes before putting them on to make sure there's nothing irritating in them or rough areas. Wear special shoes if your doctor recommends them. Replace your shoes when they show signs of wear, such as heels that are worn down on one side or lining that is torn. Are your shoes too narrow? Is your foot crammed into the shoe? If you haveneuropathy(nerve damage), you may not notice that your shoes are too tight. Use this simple test to check: The shoe should be at least 1/2 inch longer than your longest toe and as wide as your foot. It’s best to shop for shoes at the end of the day, when your feet are usually at their largest. Shoes that are too tight or too loose may lead to blisters. People with diabetes should wear shoes that have: Well-fitting, quality shoes are necessary, but you also might want to think about wearing diabetic socks. They can: All of these things help keep your feet healthy and injury-free. There’s no one standard for what makes a diabetic sock, but the best ones have things like: Flat or no seams to prevent rubbing andblisters Don't wear stretch socks or socks made of nylon. Don't wait to treat a minor foot problem if you have diabetes. Report foot injuries and infections right away. Follow your doctor's guidelines andfirst aidguidelines. Don't self-treat your corns, calluses, or otherfoot problems. Go to your doctor or podiatrist to treat these conditions. Check water temperature with your elbow or a thermometer, not your foot, to make sure it’s not hot (over about 90 F). Don't wash your feet in hot water, which could cause burns. Don't use a heating pad, water bottles, or electric blankets on your feet, because they could cause burns. Don't cross your legs or stand in one position for a long time. This can block blood flow to your feet. Watch yourblood sugar levelsand follow yourdietas your doctor directs. If you keep your blood sugar andweightunder control, you may have fewer foot problems. Don’t smoke.Smokingcan narrow your blood vessels and raise your chance of getting foot problems. Also, note any cuts, scratches, scrapes, blisters, corns, or calluses, even if they're small. Let your doctor or podiatrist know in case you need medical treatment. Your doctor should look at your feet during each visit. Give them a call when you notice problems such as: SOURCES: Singh, N.JAMA,2005. Boulton, A.New EnglandJournal of Medicine, 2004. Lipsky, B,Clinical Infectious Diseases, 2004. American Heart Association: “About Peripheral Artery Disease (PAD). CDC: “Diabetes and You: Healthy Feet Matter!” TheDiabetesCouncil.com: “Best Socks for Diabetes & Everything You Need to Know about Diabetic Socks.” Diabetes.co.uk: the global diabetes community: “Diabetes Socks.” Diabetes Forecast: “Anatomy of a Sock.” Diabetes Self-Management: “The Right Sock for Diabetes.” Diabetes Strong: Healthy Life with Diabetes: “Diabetic Socks: Everything You Need to Know.” Journal of Foot and Ankle Research:“Protective socks for people with diabetes: a systematic review and narrative analysis.” Mayo Clinic: “Mayo Clinic Q and A: Tips for using compression stockings.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Diabetes and Foot Problems,” “Prevent diabetes problems: Keep your feet healthy.” Fred Williams, MD, Endocrine and Diabetes Associates, Louisville, KY. American Diabetes Association: “Foot Complications,”  “Foot Care.” American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons: “Diabetic Complications and Amputation Prevention.” American Podiatric Medical Association: “Diabetes.” American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society: “Charcot Arthropathy.” National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse: “Diabetic Neuropathies: The Nerve Damage of Diabetes.” FamilyDoctor.org: “Diabetes: Foot Care.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.