If you have a hard time controlling whenurinecomes out of your body, it’s called urinary incontinence. It means your body has lost some control over yourbladder. It can be frustrating and embarrassing, but figuring out what’s causing your pee to leak can help you find ways to treat and cope with the problem. Normally, urine moves from yourkidneysto your bladder through tubes called ureters. Your bladder stores your urine until a signal tells yourbrainthat your bladder is full. Then urine leaves your body through a tube in yourpeniscalled the urethra.Urinary incontinencehappens either because the signal to yourbraingets scrambled or doesn’t happen, or because of a problem somewhere in your urinary tract. You may leak urine because: There are several reasons these things might be happening. There might be a medical condition behind it, or you may have had surgery recently that affects your bladder control. There are several health and lifestyle issues that can make you start to leak urine. They can include: Problems with yourprostate.It’s common for prostate issues to cause urinary incontinence. Your prostate may be larger due to a non-cancerous condition calledbenign prostatic hyperplasia(BPH). Your prostate may also be bigger than usual because ofcancer. An enlarged prostate can block your urethra. When your urethra is blocked, your bladder has to work harder to squeeze pee out. This makes its walls thicker and weaker. That makes it hard for your bladder to empty all the urine in it. You can also struggle with urinary incontinence with prostate cancer or after having certain treatments for it -- such asradiationtreatment or surgery to remove your prostate. The surgery may cause problems with the nerves that control your bladder. Certain diseases.Multiple sclerosisis a disease that can damage the nerves that tell the bladder when to empty and can also lead tobladder spasms. Some other conditions that can damage your nerves and keep your bladder from sending or receiving the signals it needs to work correctly are: Surgery.Major bowel surgery, lowerback surgery, and prostate surgery can all cause problems with your bladder. This is usually because some of the nerves in your urinary tract have been damaged during surgery. Old age.Just like other muscles in your body, your bladder loses some of its tone and strength as you age and this can cause leaks. Obesity or lack of exercise.When you don’t get enough activity, you may start carrying extra weight. When you add pounds to your body, your bladder feels more pressure. This can make you go to the bathroom more often, because you have a harder time holding your urine for a long time. Chroniccoughing.If sickness, allergies, or other problems keep you incoughingfits, it can put stress on your bladder and pelvic floor muscles. If they’re weak, they may struggle to keep pee inside. Urinary tract infection.Bacteria can sometimes infect part of your urinary tract. The infection can irritate your bladder and causeincontinence. Constipation.When your stool is hard or backed up, it can press on the nerves to your urinary system. This can cause leaks. Also good to know: drinking alcohol or taking certainmedicationslikediuretics,antidepressants, sedatives, narcotics, or over-the-counter cold and diet medicines can makeurinary incontinenceworse. So, though they don’t cause the problem, they can worsen your symptoms. It’s time to get things checked out if: SOURCES: University of Michigan Medicine: “Urinary Incontinence in Men.” The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases Health Information Center: “Bladder Control Problems in Men (Urinary Incontinence).” University of Chicago Medical Center: “Male Incontinence.” Mayo Clinic: “Urinary Incontinence.” Symptoms, causes, and treatments. Test your urine knowledge. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.