The kids won't stop screaming, your boss has been hounding you because you turned a report in late, and you owe the IRS thousands of dollars you don't have. You're seriously stressed out. Stress is actually a normal part of life. At times, it serves a useful purpose. Stress can motivate you to get that promotion at work, or run the last mile of a marathon. But if you don't get a handle on your stress and it becomes long-term, it can seriously interfere with your job, family life, and health. More than half of Americans say they fight with friends and loved ones because of stress, and more than 70% say they experience real physical and emotional symptoms from it. Read on to learn why you get stressed out, and how that stress might be affecting your health. Everyone has different stress triggers. Work stress tops the list, according to surveys. Forty percent of U.S. workers admit to experiencing office stress, and one-quarter say work is the biggest source of stress in their lives. Causes of work stress include: Life stresses can also have a big impact. Examples of life stresses are: Sometimes the stress comes from inside, rather than outside. You can stress yourself out just byworryingabout things. All of these factors can lead to stress: Your stress level will differ based on your personality and how you respond to situations. Some people let everything roll off their back. To them, work stresses and life stresses are just minor bumps in the road. Others literally worry themselves sick. When you are in a stressful situation, your body launches a physical response. Your nervous system springs into action, releasing hormones that prepare you to either fight or take off. It's called the "fight or flight" response, and it's why, when you're in a stressful situation, you may notice that your heartbeat speeds up, your breathing gets faster, your muscles tense, and you start to sweat. This kind of stress is short-term and temporary (acute stress), and your body usually recovers quickly from it. But if your stress system stays activated over a long period of time (chronic stress), it can lead to or aggravate more serious health problems. The constant rush of stress hormones can put a lot of wear and tear on your body, causing it to age more quickly and making it more prone to illness. If you've been stressed out for a short period of time, you may start to notice some of these physical signs: When stress becomes long-term and is not properly addressed, it can lead to a number of more serious health conditions, including: Managing your stress can make a real difference to your health. One study showed that women withheart diseaselived longer if they underwent a stress management program. SOURCES: American Psychological Association: "Mind/Body Health: Stress." Orth-Gomer, K.The Journal of the American Medical Association; 2000. Orth-Gomer, K.Circulation, 2009. National Ag Safety Database: "Stress Management for the Health of It." National Women's Health Information Center: "Stress and Your Health." American Psychological Association: "Stress in America." CDC, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health: "Stress ... At Work." 6 health benefits of yoga. 10 relaxation techniques to try. Different hues may affect your mood, diet, and more. Learn why you are the way you are. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.