Scoliosis is a sideways curve in your backbone (or spine). Often, it shows up when you're a child or teenager. The angle of the curve may be small, large, or somewhere in between. But anything that measures more than 10 degrees on an X-ray is considered scoliosis. Doctors may use the letters "C" and "S" to describe the curve. If you have scoliosis, you might lean a little when you stand. You could also have: In addition to visible symptoms,scoliosismay lead to: To check for scoliosis, your doctor might first ask you to bend over from the waist so they can see if your spine looks curved. Pediatricians often do this kind of exam on children. If your back looks curved, they'll likely do an X-ray to see whether it's scoliosis. Your doctor might also do an MRI to rule out things like a tumor that could cause your spine to curve. Idiopathic scoliosisis scoliosis without a known cause. In as many as 80% of cases, doctors don’t find the exact reason for a curved spine. Congenital scoliosisbegins as a baby’s back develops before birth. Problems with the tiny bones in the back, calledvertebrae, can cause the spine to curve. The vertebrae may be incomplete or fail to divide properly. Doctors may spot this rare condition when the child is born. Or they may not find it until the teen years. Neuromuscular scoliosisis caused by a disorder like spina bifida, cerebral palsy, or a spinal cord injury. These conditions sometimes damage your muscles so they don’t support your spine correctly. That can cause your back to curve. Degenerative scoliosisaffects adults. It usually develops in the lower back as the disks and joints of the spine begin to wear out as you age. Some kinds of scoliosis have clear causes. Doctors divide those curves into two categories -- structural and nonstructural. In nonstructural scoliosis, the spine works normally but looks curved. This happens for a number of reasons, such as having one leg that's longer than the other, muscle spasms, and inflammations like appendicitis. When these problems are treated, the scoliosis often goes away. In structural scoliosis, the curve of the spine is rigid and can’t be reversed. Causes include: For idiopathic scoliosis, family history and genetics can be risk factors. If you or one of your children has this condition, make sure your other kids are checked regularly. Scoliosis shows up most often during growth spurts, usually when kids are between 10 and 15 years old. About the same number of boys and girls are diagnosed with minor idiopathic scoliosis. But curves in girls are 10 times more likely to get worse and may need to be treated. Scoliosis diagnosed during the teen years can continue into adulthood. The more your spine is curved, the more likely it is to get worse over time. If you had scoliosis in the past, have your doctor check your back regularly. For mild scoliosis, you may not need treatment. Instead, your doctor might watch you and takeX-raysonce in a while to see if it's getting worse. Some children grow out of scoliosis. If you or your child need treatment, your doctor might suggest: There's no way to prevent scoliosis. So forget the rumors you may have heard, such as childhood sports injuries causing scoliosis. Likewise, if your kids are in school, you may be concerned about the weight of the textbooks they carry. While heavy backpacks may cause back, shoulder, and neck pain, they don’t lead to scoliosis. And what aboutpoor posture? The way a person stands or sits doesn’t affect their chances for scoliosis. But a curved spine may cause a noticeable lean. If your child isn’t able to stand upright, ask your doctor to look at their spine. There are three main types of spine curvature disorders, including: SOURCES: Scoliosis Research Society: "Frequently Asked Questions," "Scoliosis," "Diagnosing Scoliosis," "Neuromuscular Scoliosis," "Scoliosis Surgery Techniques." American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: "Introduction to Scoliosis," "Congenital Scoliosis," "Kyphosis (Roundback) of the Spine." The Spine Hospital at the Neurological Institute of New York: "Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis," "Degenerative Scoliosis." National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: "Questions and Answers about Scoliosis in Children and Adolescents," "What Is Scoliosis?" "Preventing Musculoskeletal Sports Injuries in Youth: A Guide for Parents." American Family Physician: "Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis: Diagnosis and Management." Mayo Clinic: "Scoliosis." Children's Hospital Boston: "Kyphosis." Cedars Sinai: "Swayback." U.S. National Library of Medicine: "Achondroplasia." Spineuniverse.com: "Spondylolisthesis: Back Condition and Treatment," "What Is Spinal Instrumentation and Spinal Fusion?" National Osteoporosis Foundation: "What Is Osteoporosis?" Brown, R.The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, 2001. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Spina Bifida Information." National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Disease: "Scoliosis." Nemours Foundation: "Scoliosis." Is a firm mattress best for back pain? Maybe not. Learn about surgery options, possible risks, and recovery. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.