Cellulitisis a common infection of theskinand the soft tissues underneath. It happens when bacteria enter a break in the skin and spread. The result is infection, which may cause swelling, redness, pain, or warmth. You’re at risk if you have:  Things that cause cellulitis include:   Cellulitiscan appear on almost any part of the body. It usually shows up on damaged skin such as inflamed wounds, dirty cuts, and areas with poor circulation. It needs to be treated by a doctor. Common symptoms include: Go to the emergency room if you have any of these symptoms:  Your doctor will do a medical history andphysical exam. Other procedures could include:  To care for cellulitis, you should: If the infection isn’t too bad, you can takeantibioticsby mouth for a week to 14 days. Your doctor will schedule a follow-up appointment. They may use IV or intramuscularantibioticsif: In serious cases, you may need to stay in the hospital. You’ll get IV antibiotics until the infection is under control (2 to 3 days), and then go home with oral medicines. It’s rare, but severe cases may need surgery. For example, doctors may need to open and drain anabscessor pus that has collected in the tissue. They may also need to cut away dead tissue to allow healing. To keep from getting cellulitis: Some injuries have a higher risk for cellulitis than others. Contact your doctor if you have:  Most people with cellulitis respond to the antibiotics in 2 to 3 days and begin to improve. In rare cases, the cellulitis may spread through the bloodstream and become serious. Even more rarely, surgery is required to drain an abscess or remove dead tissue. SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology. U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Cellulitis.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.