Chickenpox is a common illness caused by the varicella-zoster virus. Symptoms of chickenpox include fever and itchy spots orblistersall over the body. Chickenpox is usually mild and runs its course in five to 10 days, but it can cause more serious problems when teens and adults get it. People with weakened immune systems are especially susceptible to developing serious complications from chickenpox. Some complications that can arise from chickenpox include: Vaccination is the best way to prevent chickenpox. Achickenpox vaccinehas been available in the U.S. since 1995 and is easy to get from a doctor or a public health clinic. The chickenpox vaccine is very effective at preventing the disease -- between 70% and 90% of people who get vaccinated will be completely immune to chickenpox. If a vaccinated person does get chickenpox, the symptoms will be very mild and only last for a few days. All adults who have never had chickenpox or received the vaccination should be vaccinated against it. Two doses of the vaccine should be given at least four weeks apart. If you've never had chickenpox or been vaccinated and you are exposed to chickenpox, being vaccinated right away will greatly reduce your risk of getting sick. Studies have shown that vaccination within three days of exposure is 90% effective at preventing illness; vaccination within five days of exposure is 70% effective. If you do get sick, the symptoms will be milder and shorter in duration. You should not be vaccinated against chickenpox if you: These people should check with their doctor about getting the chickenpoxvaccine: The chickenpox vaccine is made from a live, weakened form of the varicella virus. That means the virus is able to produce immunity in the body without causing illness. The most common side effect from the chickenpox vaccine is swelling, soreness, or redness at the site of the injection. A small number of people may also develop a mildrashor a low-grade fever after vaccination. Serious reactions to the chickenpox vaccine are extremely rare, but they may include: If you think you may be having a serious reaction to the chickenpox vaccine, call your health care provider right away. Make a note of the symptoms you're experiencing, and report them to the Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS) at 1-800-822-7967. Women who receive the chickenpox vaccine during pregnancy should contact theirhealth careprovider right away. Chickenpox during pregnancy can cause birth defects, so there may be a risk that the chickenpox vaccine could cause the same birth defects. As with other vaccines, the risks associated with the chickenpox vaccine are much lower than the risks associated with the disease itself. SOURCES:CDC: "Varicella (Chickenpox) Vaccine Q&A," "Varicella (Chickenpox) Vaccination."Medline Plus: "Chickenpox."Merck Manuals: "Chickenpox."AdultVaccination.org: "Chickenpox (Varicella)."Immunization Action Coalition: "Chickenpox (Varicella) Vaccine Questions and Answers." 25 ways to protect yourself from illness. Learn what might put you at risk. Get answers to your questions Which ones do you need? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.