Your child uses their hips every day for walking, crawling, sitting, or standing. Because of this, hip problems can come up. This can make it hard for them to move the right way. If your child has a hip problem, they may havehip pain, but they may also have pain in theirkneeor thigh instead. They might start to limp. Or they may be in too much pain to walk at all. Your child’s hip could hurt for lots of reasons. It may be because of problems they were born with. Infections, injuries, and other things can cause it, too. If your child has this common cause of hip pain, they may limp and tell you their hip hurts after sitting for a long time. They'll also walk with their toes pointed outward. They may walk on the tips of their toes, havekneeor thigh pain, or refuse to walk if thepainis very bad. Yourbabywill cry when you move their hipjoint. This problem is most common in preschool and elementary students. Boys get it more often than girls. Doctors don’t know why, but it happens a lot in children who’ve had a virus. It may be a side effect of the body's fight against it. Your child’s pediatrician may prescribe anti-inflammatory medicine, sometimes with pain meds. Within a few weeks, they should feel better, without any lingering problems. Atbabywell visits, doctors check the movements of yourbaby’s hips. This is because in some babies, one or both hips didn't develop quite right. Some babies are born with the problem. Others have it after they’re born. It’s more common in girls. Doctors think the hormones babies get in the womb may relax the hips too much. It may be more common among kids born breech -- with theirfeetor hips first. A doctor may put yourbabyin a soft brace that keeps their knees bent for several months. This usually takes care of the problem. In rare cases, your child may need surgery. Different kinds of it can cause hip pain in children. The most common type isjuvenile idiopathic arthritis(JIA). If your child has it, they may feel stiffness or have swelling in more than one joint. Their hips may be stiff as well. Your child may also have an unusual walk or have afeverfor unknown reasons. Doctors aren’t sure what causes JIA, but it may be linked to a virus. It’s most common in children before they hitpuberty. Doctors often treat it with medicine and physical therapy. If the rounded top of the thighbone (femoral head) that fits into the hip socket (pelvis) doesn’t get enoughblood, the bone is more likely to break. It also won’t heal as well as a healthybonewould. This can cause your child to limp or have stiffness and pain in the hip, knee, or thigh. Doctors don’t know whybloodstops flowing to the hip joint in some children. It’s more common among kids up to age 8. Boys are more likely to have it. Doctors can treat it with crutches, a cast, physical therapy, or surgery. Having Legg-Calve-Perthes disease after age 6 makes someone more likely to have hip problems as an adult. This is a fracture along the growth plate under the ball joint in the hip. It's kind of like ice cream falling off the cone. This causes pain, sometimes in the hip but other times in the thigh or knee. Sometimes, your child may need crutches. Other times, they can’t walk or move their leg because the pain is so severe. It’s more common in older children (from age 8 into teenage years) and those who areoverweight. Boys get it more often. Surgery is a common treatment. Many children recover fully, but they’re more likely to havearthritisof the hip as adults. A number of them cancause painin your child’s hip. This may make them limp or give them trouble walking. One condition, calledseptic arthritis, can cause painful hip swelling and redness. It may be caused by bacteria (like astaph infection), a virus, or even afungus. Otherbacterial infectionsorLyme disease(which your child may get from the bite of an infected tick) can also cause hip pain. Antibioticsmay be all that’s needed to treat some infections. Other times, your child may need a procedure to drain the infection from the joint. Sometimes, an injury can cause hip pain. In rare cases, a tumor in the hip can cause it as well. If pain is severe or it stops your child from walking, take them to the doctor right away. Your child may need a blood test, X-ray, orMRI. Once the doctor figures out what’s causing the problem, they’ll offer a treatment. SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “The limping child.” University of Chicago: “Common causes of hip pain in children.” Nemours Foundation: “Toxic synovitis.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “Arthritis.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “Hip dysplasia.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Hip problems in infants.” Mayo Clinic: “Legg-Calve-Perthes disease: Symptoms and causes.” Mayo Clinic: “Legg-Calve-Perthes disease: Diagnosis and treatment.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Slipped capital femoral epiphysis.” Mayo Clinic: “Septic arthritis.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.