When you think of child abuse, your first thought may be of a child withbruisesor other marks that raise red flags. But the signs aren’t always so clear. Abuse can be physical, sexual, or emotional. Or a child may be neglected, meaning their caregivers don’t provide for basic needs, like food or safety. What makes abuse even harder to stop is that most of the time, the abuser is someone the child knows. They may be reluctant to say something because they may want to protect that person or they are afraid of what the abuser will do if they speak up. It’s important to know how to recognize different types of abuse, and what you can do if you suspect it. Child abuse happens when someone harms a child’s body or emotional health, development, and well-being. There are 4 main types. Physical abusemeans that someone hurts a child’s body or puts them in physical danger. It doesn’t matter if the child gets seriously hurt or if it leaves a mark. Any harm is abuse. It includes when someone: Sexual abuseis any kind of sexual activity with a child, not just physical contact. It includes when someone: Emotional abuseis a pattern of behaviors that harm a child’s emotional well-being and development. This can mean when someone: Neglectis when a caregiver doesn’t give the child basic care and protection, such as: Neglect is also when someone leaves the child alone for long stretches of time or under dangerous conditions. Other types of child abuse include: Parental substance abuse.This happens when adults neglect or harm children through the use of drugs oralcohol. It includes situations like: Medical neglect or abuse.A child is medically neglected when their caregivers don't provide them with needed medical ormental healthtreatment. Medical abuse is a rare situation in which a caregiver lies about a child's symptoms or harms them to try to get unnecessary medical attention. It's also calledMunchausen syndrome by proxy. Abandonment.Many states consider this a form of child neglect. It happens when a parent leaves a child with no support or concern for their well-being, or when the parent's location is unknown. Human trafficking.This is basically a type of slavery. Children are trafficked when they're used for prostitution or pornography, or to beg, sell drugs, or work long hours for little pay. Abuse can be hard to recognize. Kids can get cuts andbruisesor showsigns of stressfor lots of reasons that are a normal part of childhood. So it helps to know specific signs to look for, and trust your gut as you look at the whole picture of the child’s physical and emotional health. Signs of physical abusemay include: Kids who’ve been physically abused may also: Signs of sexual abusemay include: Signs of emotional abusemay include: Signs of neglectmay include: You may see the same signs of neglect in children whose parents or caregivers abuse alcohol or other drugs. Signs of child traffickingcould include:  If you suspect child abuse, it’s important to report it. It isn’t a private matter or a family problem. A child’s physical and emotional well-being, and maybe even their life, could be at stake. You don’t need proof to report abuse. If you suspect it, call your local child protective services, police, a hospital, or a hotline, such as the Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline at 800-422-4453. You don’t have to give your name. If you suspect child trafficking, call the National Human Trafficking Hotline at 888-373-7888. Depending on the situation, there are many ways you can help the child:  SOURCES: KidsHealth: “Child Abuse.” Queensland Government, Department of Communities, Child Safety and Disability Services: “What Is Child Abuse?” Mayo Clinic: “Child Abuse.” Massachusetts Executive Office of Health and Human Services: “Warning Signs for Child Abuse and Neglect.” HelpGuide.org: “Child Abuse and Neglect.” The National Child Traumatic Stress Network: “Child Sexual Abuse Fact Sheet.” Child Welfare Information Gateway: "What Is Child Abuse and Neglect? Recognizing the Signs and Symptoms." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Medical Child Abuse." U.S. Department of Education: "Human Trafficking of Children in the United States." Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.