There are a number ofskinconditions seen in infants and young children, including cradle cap, molluscum, acne, roseola, andfifth disease. Cradle cap (also called infantileseborrheic dermatitis) is arashthat begins as scaling and redness on an infant's scalp. This is not an infectious or contagious skin condition. Seborrheic dermatitis is common in infants, usually beginning in the first weeks of life and slowly disappearing over a period of weeks or months. The condition rarely is uncomfortable or itchy.  The precise cause of the rash is not known; however, it may be a result of mother’s hormonal changes in pregnancy and the influence on baby’s oil glands. Mild cases of cradle cap can be treated with mild shampoo. You should wash thehairmore frequently than before. This, along with soft brushing, will help remove the scales. Medicated shampoos (dandruffshampoos containing sulfur and 2%salicylic acid) may loosen the scales, but these shampoos can cause irritation and should be used only after consulting a pediatrician. Remember these shampoos are not tear-free, so extra caution should be used to prevent contact with the eyes. Additionalmedications, such as topicalsteroids, may be prescribed to treat the scales and redness. In most cases, frequent shampooing with a mild baby shampoo can prevent cradle cap from coming back once it has cleared up. A stronger medicated shampoo may be needed in some cases, but seek the advice of your doctor regarding the use of these shampoos. Most children outgrow cradle cap by the time they are 6 months old. Roseola is a viral illness that usually affects children between the ages of 6 months and 2 years. It is typically marked by several days ofhigh fever, followed by a pinkish-red flat or raised rash that appears on the child's trunk and spreads over the body just as the fever breaks. Roseola can be caused by two common and closely related viruses: humanherpesvirus (HHV) type 6 and type 7. These two viruses belong to the same family as theherpes simplexviruses. However, HHV-6 and HHV-7 do not cause thecold soresand genital herpes infections that HSV can cause. Roseola is contagious and spreads through tiny drops of fluid from the nose and throat of infected people. Someone who has not yet developed symptoms often spreads the infection. In most cases, a child with roseola develops a mild upper-respiratory illness, followed by a high fever (often higher than 103 degrees Fahrenheit) for three to seven days. The child may be fussy or irritable during this time, may have a weak appetite, and may haveswollen glands(lymph nodes) in the neck or the back of the head. In many cases, the high fever abruptly stops and a rash appears on the child's body at about the same time. The rash is made up of flat or raised pinkish-red spots and appears on the torso. The spots turn skin-colored (or blanches) when touched. Individual spots may have lighter areas or "halos" around them. Usually, the rash spreads to the face, legs, arms, and neck. Seizures may be a complication of roseola. To diagnose roseola, a doctor will take a history and do a thoroughphysical exam. A diagnosis of roseola is often uncertain until the fever goes down and a rash appears. As a result, the doctor may order tests to make sure that the fever is not caused by another type of infection. In most cases, roseola does not require treatment other than trying to bring down a high fever.Antibioticscannot treat roseola because it is caused by a virus. Acetaminophen(such asTylenol) oribuprofen(such asAdvilorMotrin) can help to reduce your child's fever. Avoid givingaspirinto a child because the use of aspirin in such cases has been associated with the development of Reye's syndrome, which can lead toliver failure. A sponge or towel soaked in cool water may help comfort the child until the fever drops. Ice, cold water, alcohol rubs, cold baths, and fans should be avoided. Encourage your child to drink clear fluids such as water with ice chips, children's electrolyte solutions, sodas like ginger ale, or clear broth. Fluids decrease the risk ofdehydration. Call your child's doctor if your child is lethargic, not drinking, or if you cannot keep their fever down. There is no known way to prevent the spread of roseola. The infection usually affects young children but rarely adults. Therefore, it is thought that exposure to roseola in childhood may provide some lasting immunity to the illness. Repeat cases of roseola may occur, but they are not common. Fifth diseaseis a highly contagious condition caused by human parvovirus. The condition results in a facial rash that looks like the cheeks have been slapped. Fifth disease usually affects school-aged children. Fifth disease rarely causes harm to an unborn child, but pregnant woman should be monitored in case they haven't developed immunity to the virus. The virus - Parvovirus B19 - that causes fifth disease is transmitted bysneezingorcoughing. The disease is only contagious before the rash appears. Most children with fifth generally have minimal symptoms, if any, other than a rash. Symptoms of fifth disease include: Aches in joints are sometimes seen in adults, rarely in children. In most cases, a doctor can diagnose fifth disease by seeing the typical rash during a physical exam. To confirm the diagnosis, abloodtest may be done to look for antibodies to parvovirus. There is no treatment for the disease itself, but medications like Tylenol or Advil can treat the symptoms. Those who have fifth disease should drink plenty of fluids to preventdehydration.   SOURCE: American Academy of Pediatrics. American Academy of Dermatology. CDC. Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.