Most of us don't check our kid'sblood sugar. So, chances are you don't know if it's healthy. Still, there may be clues that your child's levels are out of whack, and you may want to give your pediatrician a call. If your youngster just had anice creamsundae, you could probably guess that their blood sugar is high. You might be right. But if they're healthy, their levels will quickly get back to normal. So that kind of spike isn't really a problem. If their blood sugar levels stay up no matter what they have to eat, that's cause for concern. It could signaldiabetes. Tip-offs that your child's blood sugar level may be too high include: Constant trips to the bathroom:If it seems like they have to pee all the time, it might be because their body is trying to flush out extra glucose. Extreme thirst:If your youngster is peeing a lot, they're losing a lot of fluids. They may try to get them back by drinking more than usual. Weight lossdespite a big appetite:If your child is having trouble using glucose the right way, their body may start breaking down muscle andfatfor energy. Feelingtired, moody, or irritable:A tyke that'stoo tiredto play could literally be lacking energy, since their body isn't getting the fuel it needs. Visionproblems:High blood sugar can pull fluid from theeye, making it hard to focus. Yeast infections:Yeast thrives onsugar, which may lead to infections in girls anddiaperrashesin babies. You might assume that lowerbloodsugar is better than high. That's true, but only up to a certain point: Ifbloodsugar goes too low, it means your child won't have enough fuel. If it gets really low (your doctor may call ithypoglycemia), your child could have aseizureor even developbrain damage. A child who doesn't havediabetesmight have an episode of hypoglycemia because they skipped lunch before soccer practice. It's also possible that a medicine your child takes raises their chances of having low blood sugar. They also could have been born with a condition that affects theirmetabolism. In any case, unless the cause is clear-cut (like not eating before being active), you should have your child's pediatrician investigate. If your child haslow blood sugar, you may notice: Your child might tell you that they: The skin around theirmouthmight also tingle, and it might feel like theirheartis racing. Severe hypoglycemia can make your child pass out. If that, or a seizure, happens, call for medical help right away. SOURCES: Boston Children's Hospital: "Hypoglycemia and Low Blood Sugar Symptoms and Causes." Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health: "Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar." KidsHealth.org (Nemours): "Hyperglycemia and Diabetic Ketoacidosis," "Signs That Blood Sugar Levels Are Low." Mayo Clinic: "Type 1 Diabetes in Children." See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.