If your young child reacts to suddenpainor upset by not breathing, turning blue or pale, and thenfainting, they may have just had a breath-holding spell. When this happens, it can be scary and can cause a parent to worry. Also called breath-holding attacks, these spells are somewhat common and can happen in healthy children. They can look likeseizures, but they’re not. The spells don’t hurt the children, and many outgrow them by age 6 or 7. They are most common in 2-year-olds. Breath-holding spells come in two types. With cyanotic spells, a child’s face turns blue. With pallid spells, they become pale. Cyanotic spells are more common. Often, a breath-holding attack starts with crying in reaction to pain, fear, or anger. If your child has a cyanotic spell, they're probably upset or frustrated about something. May be they got into trouble or wants something they can’t have. They’ll cry, exhale very hard, but not breathe in again. Their face, especially around their lips, quickly will turn blue, and they’ll pass out. With a pallid spell, they likely felt a sudden pain or scare. They may have fallen backwards and bumped their head or been spooked when someone snuck up behind them. They may shout in hurt or surprise, or they may open theirmouthto shout but no sounds comes out. They’ll then stop breathing, color will drain from their face, and they’ll be out. In both cases, your child will start to breathe again within a minute and come to on their own. They may betired, but other than that, they’ll be their normal self. Your child doesn’t have these spells on purpose. It’s their body’s involuntary response to a sudden event. The reflexes change your child’s breathing pattern,heart rate, andblood pressurelevels, which make your child faint. After your child passes out, they’ll lie limply on the floor. They may also: They may or may not gasp when they start tobreatheagain. After your child’s first breath-holding spell, take them to their doctor to rule out any health problems. There are no tests to confirm a breath-holding spell. Yourpediatricianusually can diagnose it after hearing what happened. They’ll want to know what set it off, how your child looked, and how they started to breathe again. Rarely, the pediatrician may refer your child to aheartdoctor, called acardiologist, or to aneurologist, who specializes in thebrainand thenervous system, to check for any underlying causes. If your child has one breath-holding spell, they’ll likely have more. Some children have them several times a day, while others may have just one in a year. There are nodrugsor other treatments for these spells. Some studies suggest thatanemia, or low levels of redblood cells, may be a culprit and thatiron supplementsmay help. But more research is needed. The best thing to do is let your child lie on their side while they're out. That helps thebloodflow to theirbrainand gives them a chance to recover more quickly. In very rare cases, a child may not start breathing again after 1 minute. If this happens, call 911. If they're still not breathing after 3 minutes, startCPR. Your child’s doctor may teach you how to spot triggers that cause the spells, so you may prevent them. Sometimes, blowing hard on yourbaby’s face can interrupt a breath-holding spell. But this won’t work for everybaby, and it may not work for older children. Iftemper tantrumsset off breath-holding attacks, your doctor may help you figure out a new way to set limits for your child. Take care not to give in to your child just to avoid a spell. This can lead to behavior problems that may last even after they're outgrown their breath-holding spells. SOURCES: Child Neurology Foundation: “Breath-holding spells.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews: “Iron supplementation for breath-holding attacks in children.” Canadian Family Physician: “Breath-holding spells in infants.” Nemours Foundation: “Breath-holding spells.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.