Cholerais an infectious disease that causes severe waterydiarrhea, which can lead todehydrationand even death if untreated. It is caused by eating food or drinking water contaminated with a bacterium calledVibrio cholerae. Cholerawas prevalent in the U.S. in the 1800s, before modern water and sewage treatment systems eliminated its spread by contaminated water. Only about 10 cases of cholera are reported each year in the U.S. and half of these are acquired abroad. Rarely, contaminated seafood has caused cholera outbreaks in the U.S. However, cholera outbreaks are still a serious problem in other parts of the world. The World Health Organization reports that there are 1.3 million to 4 million cases each year. The disease is most common in places with poor sanitation, crowding, war, and famine. Common locations include parts of Africa, south Asia, and Latin America. If you are traveling to one of those areas, knowing the following cholera facts can help protect you and your family. Vibrio cholerae, the bacterium that causes cholera, is usually found in food or water contaminated by feces from a person with the infection. Common sources include: When a person consumes the contaminated food or water, the bacteria release a toxin in theintestinesthat produces severediarrhea. It is not likely you will catch cholera just from casual contact with an infected person. Symptoms of cholera can begin as soon as a few hours or as long as five days after infection. Often, symptoms are mild. But sometimes they are very serious. About one in 20 people infected have severe waterydiarrheaaccompanied byvomiting, which can quickly lead todehydration. Although many infected people may have minimal or no symptoms, they can still contribute to spread of the infection. Signs and symptoms ofdehydrationinclude: If not treated, dehydration can lead to shock and death in a matter of hours. There is avaccinefor cholera. Both the CDC and the World Health Organization have specific guidelines for who should be given this vaccine. You can protect yourself and your family by using only water that has been boiled, water that has been chemically disinfected, or bottled water. Be sure to use bottled, boiled, or chemically disinfected water for the following purposes To disinfect your own water, boil it for one minute (or 3 minutes at higher elevations) or filter it and use a commercial chemical disinfectant. You should also avoid raw foods, including the following: If you develop severe, watery diarrhea andvomiting-- particularly after eating raw shellfish or traveling to a country where cholera is epidemic -- seek medical help immediately. Cholera is highly treatable, but because dehydration can happen quickly, it's important to get cholera treatment right away. Hydration is the mainstay of treatment for cholera. Depending on how severe the diarrhea is, treatment will consist of oral or intravenous solutions to replace lost fluids.Antibiotics, which kill the bacteria, are not part of emergency treatment for mild cases. But they can reduce the duration of diarrhea by half and also reduce the excretion of the bacteria, thus helping to prevent the spread of the disease. SOURCES: CDC: "Cholera: General Information;"  "Cholera: Disease;" and "Cholera: Prevention and Control." "Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for Use of Cholera Vaccine." University of Alabama at Birmingham Health System: "Cholera." MedlinePlus.gov: "Cholera." World Health Organization: "Cholera." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.