Chronic myeloproliferative disorders (MPD) are rareblood cancersthat have many different symptoms, yet no clear cause. Because of that, they can be tricky to diagnose. Years of care and treatment are common. Your blood contains redblood cells, whiteblood cells, and platelets. Each of these has a crucial job to do. Your red blood cells carry oxygen throughout your body. White blood cells protect your body from germs. Platelets control your bleeding. All of these parts of blood are made in your bone marrow, the soft tissue inside your bones. If you have MPD, your bone marrow makes too many deformed red blood cells, white blood cells, or platelets. These pile up in your blood. There are six different types of MPD. The kind you have depends on which blood cells your body is making in excess. The six types are: Any of these disorders can also lead to acute leukemia. This means that your bone marrow is making deformed white blood cells. Doctors are still trying to answer this question. So far, what’s known is that if you have MPD, you have a gene mutation (change) on your bone marrow cells. This keeps your body from being able to make the right amount and kind of blood cells. You aren’t born with this mutation. It happens when you’re an adult. Some theories are that having a virus or being around toxic chemicals orradiationcan cause this to happen. Only in very rare cases do MPDs run in families. Signs that you have one of these disorders include: Major complications of these disorders include: In the early stages of MPD, many people don’t have any symptoms. This makes it a challenge to diagnose. Any signs that do show up are often thought to be other, more common health problems. It is often found by chance when you have routine blood work. You may need to see a doctor who specializes in MPD to be diagnosed. Blood tests will be ordered to get more details about your health. To confirm the diagnosis, abone marrow biopsyis often done. To do this, a hollow needle will be put into your hip bone or breastbone. Then a sample of blood, bone marrow, or bone will be removed and sent to a lab. There, it can be checked under a microscope to look forcancercells. These disorders are difficult to cure. Your doctor will typically focus on trying to get your blood cells back to normal levels and reducing the risk for major complications. The treatment depends on which myeloproliferative disorder you have. Some of the most common treatments are: Chemotherapy:Powerfulmedicationsare used to kill extra blood cells in your body. You may get this through an IV, or you could be given a pill that you take bymouth. Radiation therapy:High-powered X-rays or other types of radiation can lower the number of blood cells you have and may relieve your symptoms. Phlebotomy:A unit of blood can be removed from you in order to decrease red blood cell counts. Gene therapy:New medications may be able to block or repair the mutated gene that causes MPD. Hormone therapy:Certain hormones can extend the life of your normal blood cells or push your bone marrow to make more.Hormone therapymay also lessen some side effects of MPD. Stem celltransplant:If you have a severe case of MPD, you might be able to have astem celltransplant. During this procedure, healthy bone marrow, often from a bone marrow donor, is transferred to you. This is the only treatment that has the potential to cure MPD, but it’s not for everyone. Surgery:If yourspleenis swollen, it may be removed during a surgery called asplenectomy. Clinical trials:These studies test newcancertreatments to see if they work as well or better than what’s already being used. In some cases, they may be your best choice. You may be among the first to try a newcancermedication or treatment, while helping with a crucial part of cancer research. Watchful waiting:If your MPD is very mild and you have no symptoms, your doctor may also suggest you wait to start any treatment. Some people are fine for several years with only a dailyaspirinto preventblood clotsand regular doctor visits. SOURCES: The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center: “Myeloproliferative Disorder,” “Myeloproliferative Disorder Facts,” Myeloproliferative Disorder Symptoms,” “Myeloproliferative Disorder Diagnosis.” National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences/Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Chronic myeloproliferative disorders.” University of California San Francisco Medical Center: “Myeloproliferative Disorders Signs and Symptoms,” “Myeloproliferative Disorders Treatment.” Seattle Cancer Care Alliance: “Treatment Options.” Dana-Farber Cancer Institute: “Myeloproliferative Disorder.” Merck Manual, Consumer Version: “Overview of Myeloproliferative Disorders.” National Cancer Institute: “Chronic Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Treatment (PDQ®)–Patient Version.” Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center: “Diagnosis and Treatment of Myeloproliferative Diseases,” Chronic Myeloproliferative Neoplasms Treatment (PDQ®) Patient Version.” MPN Voice: “What Causes MPNs?” Univeristy of California San Francisco: " Myeloproliferative Disorders Treatment." What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.