Clostridium difficile(C. diff)is a type of bacteria that can causecolitis, a seriousinflammationof thecolon. Infections fromC. diffoften start after you've been takingantibiotics. It can sometimes be life-threatening. When you haveC. diff, the symptoms can range from mild to severe. Mild symptoms can include problems like: In more serious infections, there may bebloodor pus in the stool. This can happen becauseC. diffcan cause the colon -- also called the large intestine -- to get inflamed. When this happens, tissue in the colon can bleed or make pus. Other symptoms of a serious infection include: If yourC. diffinfection is severe, you could get severe intestinalinflammation. Your colon could also get enlarged and you could develop an extreme response to infection calledsepsis. All of these problems are serious and could send you to the hospital. If your diarrhea fromC. diffis very severe, get medical help quickly. Severe diarrhea can lead to life-threatening dehydration. C. diffexists all around us. It's in the air,water, soil, and in the feces of humans and animals. C. diffbacteria that are outside the body turn into spores that can live on surfaces for weeks or months. These spores are not "active," but they can turn active after you swallow them and they get into your intestines. Some people have the bacteria in theirintestinesand never have any symptoms. But for others, the bacteria make toxins that attack theintestines. A newstrainofC. diffbacteria makes larger amounts of toxins. These types are hard to treat withmedications. C. diffbacteria spread inhealth carefacilities, like hospitals or nursing homes, where workers are more likely to come into contact with it and then with patients or residents. You can also become infected if you touch clothing, sheets, or other surfaces that have come in contact with feces and then touch yourmouthor nose. Older adults inhealth carefacilities are most at risk, especially if they're taking antibiotics. That's because the human body contains thousands of different types of bacteria -- some good, some bad. If the antibiotics kill enough healthy bacteria, the ones that causeC. diffcould grow unchecked and make you sick. The antibiotics that are most linked to a risk ofC. diffinfection are: An increasing number of younger people also developC. diffinfections, even without taking antibiotics or being in a hospital. Failure towash your handsthoroughly after being exposed to the bacteria can lead to infection. You also have higher odds of gettingC. diffif you have: Women have higher chances of gettingC. diffthan men. You're also more at risk for the disease if you're 65 or older. And your odds ofC. diffgo up the more times you've had the disease before. If aC. diffinfection isn't treated quickly, you could become dehydrated due to severe diarrhea. This loss of fluids might also affect your: AC. diffinfection also can lead to rare problems such as: If your doctor suspects you have this infection, they'll probably order one or more stool tests. They include: If your doctor suspects serious problems with your colon, they might order X-rays or aCT scanof your intestines. In rare cases, your doctor may examine your colon with procedures such as a flexiblesigmoidoscopyor colonoscopy. Antibiotics may have triggered your infection, but some types of these drugs targetC. diff. They include: Talk with your doctor about the side effects of these antibiotics. It's important to replace fluids that you lost from diarrhea. Drink plenty of fluids that havewater, salt, andsugar, such as broth and fruit juices. If there's been damage to your intestines, you may need surgery to remove the affected areas. Sometimes, aC. diffinfection can come back. Doctors sometimes recommend a treatment to help repopulate the colon with healthy bacteria. It's often done by putting another person's stool in your colon using a device called a colonoscope. The procedure is calledfecal microbiota transplant (FMT). Donors are screened carefully to make sure they're not passing along infections orparasites. If you're in a hospital or long-termhealth carefacility, you can do several things to protect yourself fromC. diff. For example: Another way to help preventC. diffis to not take unnecessary antibiotics. Talk this over with your doctor and see if there are other treatment options. And don't take antibiotics without a doctor's OK. ManyC. diffinfections are mild and short-lived, but others can be quite serious. Take precautions, and don't hesitate to seek medical help if you have symptoms. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: "C. Difficile Infection," "C. Difficile Infection: Symptoms and Causes," "C. Difficile Infection: Treatment." CDC: "Clostridium Difficile Infection Information for Patients," "Clostridium Difficile (C. diff.)," "Prevent the Spread of C. diff." Wisconsin Department of Health Services: "Clostridium difficile: Disease Fact Sheet." California Department of Public Health: "Clostridium difficile infection (CDI)." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection." Yale Medicine: "Clostridium difficile (C. diff) infection." Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.