Cluster headachesare a series of relatively short but very painfulheadachesevery day for weeks or months at a time. You tend to get them at the same time each year, such as in the spring or fall. Because of this, people often mistake cluster headaches forsymptoms of allergiesor workstress. Experts don't know what causes them, but a nerve in your face is involved, creating intensepainaround one of youreyes. It's so bad that most people can't sit still and will often pace during an attack. Cluster headaches can be more severe than amigraine, but they usually don't last as long. These are the least common type of headaches, affecting fewer than one in 1,000 people. Men get them more than women do. You usually start getting them before age 30. Cluster headaches may go away completely (this is called going into remission) for months or years, but they can come back without any warning. You get a cluster headache when a nerve pathway in the base ofyour brainis triggered. That signal seems to come from a deeper part of the brain called thehypothalamus, home of the "internal biological clock" that controls yoursleepand wake cycles.   The nerve that's affected, the trigeminal nerve, is responsible for sensations such as heat or pain in your face. It's near youreye, and it branches up to your forehead, across your cheek, down your jaw, and above yourearon the same side. A brain condition, such as a tumor oraneurysm, won't cause these headaches. There are a few things that set this type of headache apart. They include:  The pain usually starts suddenly, often around or behind the eye. You may notice: Cluster headaches are more common in people who smoke or who are heavy drinkers. During a cluster period, you'll be more sensitive to alcohol and nicotine. Just a bit ofalcoholcan trigger a headache. But drinking won't trigger one during headache-free periods. When you’re in a cluster period, any of these can bring on a headache:  Both types of headaches cause intense pain. But the way they hurt and where you feel them are different. Migraine headachesbegin slowly and can last a few hours to a few days. You might get some warning signs up to a day before the pain starts, like cravings for certain foods or changes in your mood. You might also see auras just before the migraine hits. Migrainegives you a throbbing pain. A cluster headache usually hurts on just one side of your head, but you might feel a migraine on both sides, on one side only, or along your forehead. It will probably get worse when you move your head. You may also have: After a migraine ends, you can have a sort of "hangover," where you feeltiredor confused. You may hear your doctor call this a postdrome period. Many things can trigger a migraine, such as:  You have several options when it comes to treating cluster headaches: Medications Acute attack treatmentshelp when the headache hits: Preventive medicinecan often stop a headache before it starts. Your doctor can prescribe medication to make a cluster shorter and make attacks less severe, including: Occipitalnerve block(your doctor may also call it occipital nerve injection). The doctor will inject a mix of anesthetic andsteroidinto these nerves. They’re at the base of your skull, and they’re often the starting point for headaches. This is a temporary treatment until a preventive can start to work. Nerve stimulation.If medication doesn’t work, some people have success with: Surgery If nothing else works, surgery may be an option for people who don't get a break from cluster headaches. Deep brain stimulation, which involves placing an electrode deep into the brain, is losing favor to less invasive options. Most procedures involve blocking the trigeminal nerve, a main pathway for pain. It controls the area around your eye, but a misstep can lead to weakness in your jaw and loss of sensation in your face and head. Lifestyle changes These moves can help you avoid cluster headaches: Alternative treatments Talk to your doctor about: Breathingexercises Breathing exercises have real effects on your body that help keep you calm and control your stress. And for people who gettension headachesor migraine, they can be a key part of treatment. But are they any match for the intense pain of a cluster headache? While there haven't been studies to show it, some doctors think they're worth trying. After all, there's no harm, and it won't cost you anything. Breathing exercises can lower anxiety. So if you worry about your next attack, they're a good tool to help you stay even and relaxed. You can try different types of breathing. No matter which one you use, it helps to: It's also best to set aside time for it each day. This regular practice will train your body to fall into the breathing more easily when you need it. If you do it only when you're in pain, it'll be much harder to really sink into it. And keep in mind that these exercises can’t replace medicine. They're something to use along with your normal treatment. Deep breathing.When you're stressed and anxious, you tend to take shorter breaths than usual. This exercise helps you reset. The aim is slow, deep, and steady breaths: With each full, deep breath, yournervous systemtakes it down a notch. Rhythmic breathing.If your breathing style is usually short and fast, this exercise will help you slow it down a bit: As you notice yourself getting calmer, you give your body feedback that helps you relax even further. Visualized breathing.For this one, you combine breathing with pictures in your mind:  Photo Credit: maxkabakov / Getty Images SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Cluster Headaches,” "Relaxation and Other Alternative Approaches for Managing Headaches." American Migraine Foundation: “Cluster Headache,” “Nerve Stimulation for Chronic Migraine,” “Non-Invasive Neuromodulation Devices,” “Occipital Nerve Blocks,” “Treatment of Cluster Headache,” "Biofeedback and Relaxation Training for Headaches." Mayo Clinic: “Cluster headache.” American Family Physician: "Management of Cluster Headache." National Health Service (U.K.): "Seven Relaxation Tips to Help Headaches," "Cluster Headaches." Nauman Tariq, MD, assistant professor of neurology, director of Headache Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine. Meghan Hickey, MD, general neurologist, Baystate Medical Center. Sam Houston State University: "Headaches." Migraine Trust: "Cluster Headache,” "Symptoms and Stages of Migraine." UCSF: "For the Most Painful Headaches, a Simple, Drug-Free Treatment Usually Works." National Health Service (U.K.), Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham: "Oxygen Therapy for Cluster Headaches." National Headache Foundation: "Cluster Headaches." Headache: “Cluster Headache -- Acute and Prophylactic Therapy.” UpToDate: "Cluster headache: Treatment and prognosis." MedlinePlus: "Verapamil." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Migraines." American Headache Society: "Migraine Treatments." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Headache: Hope Through Research." Office on Women's Health: "Migraine Fact Sheet." IHS Classification ICHD-3 Beta. What aura looks like, triggers, and more. Get the truth about migraine. Could pot ease your pain? Test your knowledge of triggers, types, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.