If you want to craft a battle plan to preventcolds, you don't have to think long and hard about it. Just remember three simple words:Wash your hands! There's no secret in why that works. It's all due to the waycoldsspread. The main waycoldsget passed around is when someone who's sickcoughsor sneezes. Little droplets with germs land on places like doorknobs, telephones, and computer keyboards. Or the sick personcoughsor sneezes into their hands and then touches those objects. Then you come along, happy and healthy, and touch that spot. Next, without even realizing it, you might touch your nose andmouth. Voila! In an instant you're infected. Some viruses -- tiny living things that causecolds-- can live on surfaces for hours. Regularhand washingis your best strategy to keep them from getting inside your body. And of course, if you're the one who's sick, washing up will keep you from spreading your germs. There's some evidence behind this. A program called Operation StopCoughwas started at a military recruit training command center in Illinois. As part of the program, recruits were told to wash their hands at least five times a day. After 2 years, the hand-washing team reported 45% fewer cases of respiratory illness, compared with sickness rates among recruits during the year before the program started. Many of us get so busy, we simply forget to wash our hands the right way. Here's the drill: You should wash hands often throughout the day. For example, do it before and after you eat, after using the bathroom, after school, and after handling any raw meat, unwashed vegetables, or garbage. Alsowash your handsaftercoughing,sneezing, blowing your nose, or touching your pet. If you're babysitting, wash before and after changing a baby's diapers and before and after feedings. Keep an alcohol-based sanitizer for hands if a sink is unavailable. It should be at least 60% alcohol. Rub the entire surface of your hands, fingers, and wrist with the sanitizer until dry. You can use this throughout the day if you're not near a bathroom. Follow up with a thorough hand scrub when you're near a sink to prevent buildup of the sanitizer. SOURCES:CDC: "CDC Clean Hands Campaign," "Clean Hands Save Lives," "Stop the Spread of Germs."FDA: "Hand Washing."Thompson, K.Overkill,Rodale Books, 2002. 15 tips to help you feel better. Do echinacea and vitamin C really help a cold? Get a good night’s rest with these remedies. Eat these to fight colds, flu, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.