A Colles' fracture -- or distal radius fracture -- is often called a ''broken wrist.''  In France it’s sometimes called a “Pouteau-Colles” fracture. Technically, it's a break in the larger of the two bones in your forearm. The bone breaks on the lower end, close to where it connects to the bones of the hand on the thumb side of the wrist. Colles'fracturesare very common; they're the most frequently broken bone in the arm. In the United States, 1 of every 10 broken bones is a broken wrist. Symptoms of a broken wrist can include: To diagnose a broken wrist, your doctor will give you a thoroughphysical exam. You may need several sets of X-rays, since the fracture may be hard to see at first. Occasionally, a broken wrist can affect the nerves orbloodflow. You should go to the emergency room if: Usually, these injuries result from falling onto an outstretched arm or getting hit on the wrist. Broken wrists are common in people who play contact sports, as well as skiers, inline skaters, and bikers. People withosteoporosisor thinning of the bones are at particularly high-risk for wrist fractures. But they can happen to anyone who takes a fall or gets hit. If the broken wrist isn’t in the correct position to heal, your doctor may need to reset it. This can be pretty painful so it's usually done with anesthesia. However, painkillers will help afterward. You will probably also need: You will probably also want to: Most of the time, these treatments will be enough. But sometimes, people with a broken wrist need surgery. Your doctor might suggest this if the bone is not likely to heal well in a cast. Sometimes, pins, plates, screws, or other devices are needed to hold the bone in place so it can mend. Of course, what you really want to know is when you can get back in the game after breaking your wrist. There's no easy answer. Here are some things to keep in mind during recovery from a broken wrist: If you get prompt treatment and good follow-up care for a Colles’ fracture, you can usually avoid complications. Complications that can happen without quick treatment or with serious injuries include nerve or blood vessel injuries. Some people also develop compartment syndrome, a condition that happens when pressure in muscles gets dangerously high. These complications usually happen soon after the fracture. Complications that can happen later include carpal tunnel syndrome and osteoarthritis. Sometimes the fracture doesn’t heal in the right position, and this can cause tendon injury and ongoing pain. In more serious cases of Colles’ fracture, the following may happen: These types of broken wrists may be harder to treat. A broken wrist is tough to prevent, since it usually happens during an accidental fall. But it can help to use wrist guards during risky sports, like inline skating. Sometimes, a broken wrist can indicateosteoporosis, especially in women. Talk to your doctor about your risk factors forosteoporosisand fractures. There are steps you can take to improve your bone health. SOURCES:American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons web site: ''Distal Radius Fracture (Colles' Fracture).''Davis, M.F., et al.Expert Guide to Sports Medicine, American College of Physicians Press, 2005.Rouzier, P.The Sports Medicine Patient Advisor,second edition, SportsMed Press, 2004.Small Fragment Set Manual: “The Wrist Joint.”StatPearls:“Colles’ Fracture.”OrthoInfo (American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons): “Compartment Syndrome.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.