Colorectal cancer, sometimes calledcolon cancer, starts when cells that line your colon or rectum grow out of control. It’s the third leading cause of cancer deaths among American men and women. In the U.S., about 72% of colorectal cancer cases start in thecolonand 28% in the rectum. The colon is also called the large intestine, which is part of yourdigestive system. It absorbs water and nutrients from food after it moves through yourstomachand small intestine. Solid waste (poopor stool) is stored in your colon before moving to the rectum. This 8-inch tube holds the waste until it leaves your body through theanus. Most colorectal cancers are "silent" tumors. They grow slowly, and you may not notice any symptoms until they’re large. But you can take some steps to prevent colorectalcancer, and you can cure it if you find it early. It’s important to have regular screening exams to spot cancer or precancerous areas, especially if you have a high risk of getting it. There are several types of colorectal cancer, based on where it starts. Nearly all colon and rectal cancers begin as a polyp, a growth on the inner surface of your colon. Polyps themselves usually aren’t cancer. The most common types of polyps in your colon and rectum include: Colorectal cancer may also start in an area of abnormal cells, called dysplasia, in the lining of your colon or rectum. Anyone can get colorectal cancer. It’s most common among African Americans and people over age 50. The lifetime chance of developingcolorectal canceris 1 in 22 for men and 1 in 24 for women. Things that can raise your chances of getting it include: Polyps might be more likely to contain cancer or carry a higher chance of cancer if: You might not notice anysigns of colorectal cancer. When you have them, they can include: Your doctor may give you aphysical examand feel your belly for any swollen organs or masses. They might also order one or more of these tests to spot polyps or colorectal cancer: Tumors may bleed in amounts so small that only special tests can find it. This is called occult bleeding, meaning you probably can’t see it with the naked eye. These tests can look for blood in your poop: If either of these tests finds blood, your doctor will probably recommend a colonoscopy. If a test finds a polyp, your doctor will take it out and send it to a laboratory. A specialist will look at it under a microscope. Your doctor will discuss the results with you. They will recommend next steps, including when to have another colonoscopy. If you have colorectal cancer, tests can tell your doctor whether it has grown or spread. This process is called staging. The stages of colorectal cancer are: Treatment will depend on several things. You and your doctor should consider: You might have one or more of these treatments: Surgery Your doctor can take out polyps and small tumors that haven’t spread during a colonoscopy or through a laparoscopy, in which they put special tools and cameras into your belly through small cuts. If the cancer has spread, you might have surgery to remove part of your colon (partial colectomy). If cancer has spread to your liver and nowhere else, surgery is your best chance for a cure. But it’s not an option for everyone. Your doctor must be able to take out all the cancer. And you need enough healthy tissue left over for your liver to still work. If your tumor is very large, you might have chemotherapy to help shrink it before surgery. Procedures called ablation and embolization can also treat cancer that has spread to the liver. They can destroy tumors without removing them. Sometimes, doctors use high-energy radio waves or electromagnetic microwaves to kill cancer cells. Or they may inject the tumor with alcohol or freeze it with a metal probe. With embolization, a substance blocks blood flow to the tumor. Radiation therapy Radiation therapyuses high-energy X-rays, electron beams, or chemical agents called radioactive isotopes to attack cancer. The radiation is aimed directly at the tumor. It damages chromosomes in cancer cells so they can't multiply. External radiation therapyis the most common form for people with colorectal cancer. A machine aims a beam of radiation at your tumor. It's painless. Before treatment begins, a team of specialists, including a radiation oncologist, will use measurements from scans to find the exact spot to aim the radiation. They'll tattoo small dots on your body to show where to target the beam. This ensures that they get the same location at every treatment. You'll need to be still during the procedure, but it lasts only a few minutes. You may have five treatments a week for several weeks, and sometimes, you'll be treated a few times a day for several weeks. There are many kinds of external beam radiation. These include 2D, 3D conformal, IMRT, IGRT, and proton beam therapy. Radiation can also beinternal.Interstitial radiation therapy (also known as brachytherapy) uses a tube to place small pellets, or seeds, of radioactive material directly into your tumor. After 15 minutes, they're taken out. You may have up to two treatments a week for 2 weeks. Endocavitary radiation therapyis often used for rectal cancer.A device called a proctoscope is placed in your anus to carry radiation directly to the tumor. It stays there a few minutes and then is taken out. You'll probably have four treatments, each about 2 weeks apart. Side effects tend to be specific to the area of your body that gets the radiation. Talk to your doctor about what you can expect. You may have: Most side effects should get better a few weeks after treatment ends, but some may not go away.Medicationsand other treatments may help. Radiofrequency ablation This killscancercells using a probe with electrodes. Chemotherapy Chemodrugs destroy cancer cells or stop them from spreading. You can take the medicines in pill form or through an IV. You can also get them in a blood vessel close to your tumor. There are many types of these drugs. Some work better together, so you may take two or more at the same time. You usually get the treatment for 2 or 4 weeks and then take a break. You might have chemo after surgery to kill any cancer cells left behind. Or you could have it before an operation to make a tumor smaller and easier to remove. Chemo may help treat cancer pain too. And it's often the best way to slow the spread of the disease. The downside is that the drugs can attack healthy cells as well as cancerous ones. This can cause side effects like hair loss, vomiting, and mouth sores. You may also feel very tired and get sick easily. But these problems usually get better when your treatment is over. Immunotherapy Immunotherapy, a type of biological therapy, uses your body's immune system to fight cancer. It includes: Like other forms of cancer treatment, immunotherapy may have a number of side effects. They can vary widely from person to person. Biologic response modifiers may cause flu-like symptoms, including fever, chills,nausea, and loss of appetite. In addition,rashesor swelling may develop at the injection site, andblood pressuremay fall.Fatigueis another common side effect. Colony-stimulating factors might causebonepain,fatigue, fever, and loss of appetite. The side effects of monoclonal antibodies vary. They may include serious allergic reactions. Rashes are common and may be a severe side effect ofErbituxor Vectibix. They usually mean that these drugs are working. Bleeding, blood clotting, or bowel perforation may be side effects ofAvastinor Cyramza. Vaccines can cause muscle aches and low-grade fever. Immune checkpoint inhibitors can have serious side effects. One concern is that they can allow the immune system to attack normal organs in the body. More common side effects include fatigue, cough, loss of appetite, and rash. Targeted therapy This uses drugs that focus on specific things in cancer cells, like genes or proteins, to kill them or keep them from growing. Some come in pill form. You get others in your vein (IV) at a hospital, doctor’s office, or clinic. Most are given along with standard chemo medicines. Medications used astargeted therapiesfor colorectal cancer include: Targeted therapies can cause serious side effects. Some of the most common are: Palliative (supportive) care This doesn’t try to cure cancer. Its goal is to help you feel better. It also provides support for your family and caregivers. And it can help you make decisions about the kind of care you want in the months and years ahead. Ask your doctor aboutpalliative careas soon as you find out that you have cancer. Your care team can prescribe meds to ease pain and side effects. Palliative care can also ease depression and may help you live longer. After you’ve finished yourtreatments for colorectal cancer, follow-up care is very important. Regular checkups can help find any changes in your health, and if the cancer comes back (or “recurs”), it can be treated as soon as possible. Ongoing care You may need to see many different doctors during the months and years after you finishtreatment. Your oncologist will usually start out as your main contact. They’ll give you a schedule for screenings and tests. They may ask your primary care doctor to take over your care at some point. Be sure you have a summary of your cancer treatment that includes: Bring this summary with you for all your appointments, since you may not always see the same doctor. Ask your doctor any questions you may have about your day-to-day life, such as whether it would help to make changes in yourdietorexercisehabits. Tell them about anysupplementsyou take, even “natural” products or vitamins and minerals. That way, your doctor can check on anything that might have side effects or interact with your medicines. If you feel down or anxious, tell your doctor that, too. They may be able to recommend a counselor or a support group. Follow-up tests What types of screenings you have and how often you get them will depend on the type and stage ofcanceryou had and the treatments you got. You'll probably need check-ups three to four times a year during the first 2 or 3 years after treatment and one or two times a year after that. These might include: When to call your doctor Call your doctor right away if you have: A healthy tobacco-free lifestyle is the first step in preventing cancer of any kind. Experts recommend that as an initial step toward the prevention of colorectal cancer, people shouldexerciseand eat healthily. The American Cancer Society says adults should get 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of high-intensity exercise (or a combination of these) each week. The National Cancer Institute recommends a low-fat, high-fiber diet that includes at least 2 1/2 cups offruits and vegetableseach day. Cut back on red meat and other high-fat foods, such as eggs and many dairy products. You can get the protein you need from low-fat dairy products (also a good source of calcium), nuts, beans, lentils, and soybean products. Avoid overcooking or barbecuing meats and fish. Some experts suggest that aspirin may stop colorectal cancer cells from multiplying. In addition, other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs, such as Aleve and Motrin) may reduce the size of polyps and, therefore, the risk of colon cancer. This theory has not been well established, and the proper dosage is unclear. Also, NSAIDs may raise your odds of serious complications, such as stomach bleeding, heart attacks, and strokes. If you’re at high risk of colon cancer, don’t start taking aspirin or other NSAIDs until you discuss it with your doctor. Women who have gone through menopause and who take hormone replacement therapy that includes both estrogen and progesterone may be less likely to get colon cancer. But if they do, it may be more advanced when it’s found.Hormone replacement therapyalso raises the risk of other cancers. Talk with your doctor about the risks and benefits. Screening for colorectal cancer is crucial. The American Cancer Society and the US Preventive Services Task Force recommends that people get regular screening exams from ages 45 to 75 if they have an average chance of getting colorectal cancer. This means that you don’t have symptoms and that neither you nor a close family member has had colorectal polyps, cancer, or inflammatory bowel disease. The guidelines include at least one of these tests: Talk to your doctor if you have one or more of the colorectal cancer risk factors. You might need to start screenings at a younger age, get tested more often, or have specific kinds of tests. If you’re 76 through 85, talk to your doctor about whether you should be tested. The American Cancer Society doesn’t recommend testing for people older than 85. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology. CDC. American Association of Family Physicians. National Institutes of Health. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Colorectal Cancer,” “Role of chemotherapy in improving survival in stage IV colon cancer patients without surgery: An NCDB analysis,” "Follow-Up Care for Colorectal Cancer." American Cancer Society: “Colorectal Cancer,” “Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumor (GIST),”  "Immune checkpoint inhibitors to treat cancer," "What is cancer immunotherapy?" "Cancer vaccines," "Monoclonal antibodies to treat cancer,” "How many people get colorectal cancer?" "How is Colorectal Cancer Diagnosed?" "Six Ways to Lower Your Risk for Colon Cancers,” "Colorectal cancer screening tests," "Frequently Asked Questions About Colonoscopy and Sigmoidoscopy,” "Immunotherapy for Colorectal Cancer,” “Understanding Targeted Therapy,” “A Guide to Palliative or Supportive Care,” “What is Immunotherapy,” "What happens after treatment for colorectal cancer?" "If treatment for colorectal cancer stops working,” "What are the key statistics about colorectal cancer?" "How is colorectal cancer treated?" "Surgery for colorectal cancer," "Ablation and embolization to treat colorectal cancer," "Chemotherapy for colorectal cancer," "Targeted therapies for colorectal cancer," "Questions you may have about targeted cancer therapies," "Radiation therapy for colorectal cancer." American College of Gastroenterology: “Colorectal Cancer.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Colorectal Cancer.” Cancer Research UK: “Bowel cancer,” "Side effects of bowel cancer radiotherapy." National Cancer Institute: “Colorectal Cancer – Patient Version,” "NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms,” "Colon Cancer Treatment (PDQ),” “Targeted Cancer Therapies,” “Follow-Up Care After Cancer Treatment.” Mayo Clinic: “Colon cancer,” "Types of biopsy procedures used to diagnose cancer,” “Nivolumab (Intravenous Route): Side Effects.” WebMD Medical Reference from the American College of Physicians: “Section 12 V Colorectal Cancer.” CDC: "What Is Colorectal Cancer?" Deisler, D.Clinical Colorectal Surgery Journal,Aug 2007. John Hopkins Medicine: "Brachytherapy." National Center for Biotechnology Information: "Colorectal Cancer: The Diagnosis and Management of Colorectal Cancer." University of Mississippi Medical Center: "Colorectal Cancer Biopsy & Pathology." Screenforcoloncancer.org: "Colonoscopy." University Hospitals Seidman Cancer Center: "Colonoscopy." Cancer Council (Australia): “Treatment for Advanced Cancer.” FDA: “Keytruda Medication Guide.” Texas Oncology: “Stage IV Colon Cancer.” UptoDate: “Patient education: Colorectal cancer treatment; metastatic cancer (Beyond the Basics).” CancerNetwork.com: “Will DNA Vaccine TetMYB Be a Game-Changer in Advanced Colorectal Cancer?” American Society for Colon & Rectal Surgeons. Cleveland Clinic: "Colon and Rectal Cancer." National Comprehensive Cancer Network: "Taking Charge of Follow-Up Care." The age people should begin getting routine screenings. What to expect when the cancer spreads to other areas. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.