Comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) is a series ofbloodtests that give your doctor a snapshot of your body’s liver and kidney function, and electrolytes. It’s also called a chemistry panel of Chem-14, chemistry 14, or chemistry screen. Most people get a CMP as part of their yearly checkup. The doctor might also want one to check you for problems, keep track of any chronic conditions you have, or make sure certainmedicationsaren’t hurting yourliverorkidneys. They might tell you not to eat or drink anything except water for up to 12 hours before you get this test. The CMP can tell your doctor: The doctor may give you a basic metabolic panel (BMP) instead of a CMP based on your health history and your needs. It includes eight of the same tests as CMP. It doesn’t include the liver and protein tests. A nurse or doctor will use a needle to take a blood sample from a vein in your arm. They’ll collect the blood in a test tube or vial. You may feel a little sting when the needle goes in or out. This usually takes less than 5 minutes. You may have slight pain or bruising at the spot where the needle was put in, but most symptoms go away quickly. The doctor will look at all the tests together to check for patterns. The combination of patterns can tell there’s a concern you could have liver or kidney disease. If you’re in the hospital, the doctor may do daily tests. If you aren’t but you have a disease like diabetes or kidney disease, you may go to the doctor’s office or a clinic every few months for tests. Your report will usually have one column called a “reference range” and another for your results. If your results are inside the reference range, they’re normal. If they’re above or below it, they’re considered abnormal. A lot of things can affect a CMP, such as: If any of your results are not what they should be, your doctor might ask you to come back for more tests. This will help your doctor figure out if there’s a true problem or not. Normal comprehensive metabolic panel results Reference ranges depend on the lab that handles your blood tests. Why? Because different labs use their own special equipment. They also have different ways of analyzing your blood. General ranges for what’s considered normal are listed below. But always go by the ranges that are on your report because that’s what your doctor will use. There are more than a dozen tests in a CMP, but your doctor may change a few to look for certain clues about what’s going on in your body. Listed below are the main tests usually included in a CMP: CMP liver tests These check three substances your liver makes: ALP, ALT, and AST. They also checkbilirubin, a waste product of your liver. CMP kidney tests The CMP checks two waste products of your kidneys:blood urea nitrogen(BUN) andcreatinine. CMP electrolyte test These help your body balance its fluids. They also help control your heartbeat and how your muscles and yourbrainwork. Abnormal results could mean you haveheart diseaseor kidney disease, or that you’re dehydrated, among other causes. CMP protein test The CMP tests albumin, the main protein made by your liver, and the proteins in your blood in general. Proteins are important for healthy muscles, bones, blood, and organs. If these come back low, it could mean liver or kidney disease or a problem with nutrition. CMP glucose test This is also commonly called ablood sugartest. If your levels are high, it could mean you havediabetes. If they’re too low, you could have a condition calledhypoglycemia. CMP calcium test This is important for healthy muscles, nerves, and hormones. Ifcalciumis abnormal, you might have ahormoneimbalance or problems with your kidneys, bones, orpancreas. SOURCES: Scripps Health: “Comprehensive Metabolic Panel.” University of Rochester Medical Center: “Comprehensive Metabolic Panel.” American Association for Clinical Chemistry (labtestsonline.org): “Comprehensive Metabolic Panel,” “Reference Ranges and What They Mean.” The Nemours Foundation: “Blood Test: Comprehensive Metabolic Panel.” MedlinePlus: “Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP).” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.