Hydrocephalusis a condition in which too much fluid builds up in thebrain. The name comes from a combination from Greek words meaning “water” and “head.” “Congenital” means a person is born with it. The liquid that builds up isn’t water. It’s cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). It circulates through thebrain, bringing importantnutrientsand flushing away waste products from tissues. Normally, it’s absorbed into the bloodstream. With hydrocephalus, there’s an imbalance between how fast fluid is made and how quickly it’s absorbed. The result is that it builds up. This can cause the head to enlarge and increase pressure around thebrain. There are treatments to help, depending on the underlying cause. In general, an imbalance can happen for any one of three reasons: Congenital hydrocephaluscan be genetic or caused by something else that occurred duringpregnancy. Common reasons for congenital hydrocephalus include: Routineultrasoundtests during pregnancy may be able to pick up problems with your baby’s brain development, such as enlarged ventricles or spaces within the brain. If a problem shows up on ultrasound, further tests can help diagnose the issue more clearly. Because some babies with hydrocephalus also have other serious health issues, your doctor will want to get a full picture of your baby’s overall condition. So you might get other tests, such as anMRI– which can provide more details on your baby’s brain development. Your doctor may also take a sample of youramniotic fluid, to check on your baby’s chromosomes. Your doctor will also want to know about your family’s health history, especially if any of your relatives have had any neural tube defects. Even though doctors can diagnose hydrocephaly in the womb, treatment generally doesn’t begin until your baby is born. The most common treatment for congenital hydrocephaly is a shunt system. A surgeon will place a flexible plastic tube in the baby’s brain to drain the extra fluid. The other end of the tube goes under the skin and into the belly, or another place in the body where the excess CSF can be absorbed. Another possible treatment is called ETV (endoscopic third ventriculostomy), which uses fiber-optic technology. A doctor guides a small camera into a baby’s brain and, with a tool, opens a hole in a ventricle, bypassing a blockage. The brain fluid then drains through that hole and is absorbed into the bloodstream. The outlook for babies born with hydrocephalus varies and depends in part on the cause of the condition. Shunt systems have to be watched carefully. Your child might need more than one procedure. Among the problems that can crop up: ETV also has some risks. The opening in the ventricle could close suddenly, which can be life-threatening. Infection, fever and bleeding also could occur. Even when it’s treated, congenital hydrocephalus can affect physical and intellectual development. Your child may need rehabilitation and special education, but a normal life with just a few limitations is possible. SOURCES: National Institutes of Health - National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Hydrocephalus Fact Sheet.” Hydrocephalus Association: “Hydrocephalus.” Boston Children’s Hospital: “Conditions and Treatments -- Hydrocephalus in Children.” Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: “Hydrocephalus.” University of California San Francisco Benioff Children’s Hospital: “Congenital Hydrocephalus.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.