If you havechronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD), it may be harder for you to eat well and to exercise. Your energy may be limited, making it harder to be physically active or to do things like prepare and eat meals. But exercise and good nutrition can help you live better with COPD. Learn why – and what you can do to stay healthier. Exercise– especiallyexercisethat works yourlungsandheart– has many benefits for people who haveCOPD. Exercise can: These four types of exercise can help you if you haveCOPD. How much you focus on each type depends on the COPD exercise program yourhealth careprovider suggests for you. Stretching exerciseslengthen your muscles, making you more flexible. Aerobic exercisesuse large muscle groups to move at a steady, rhythmic pace. This type of exercise works your heart andlungs, improving their endurance. This helps your body use oxygen better and, with time, can improve your breathing. Walking and using a stationary bike are two good aerobic exercises if you have COPD. Strengthening exercisesinvolve tightening muscles until they begin to tire. When you do this for the upper body, it can help increase the strength of your breathing muscles. Breathing exercisesfor COPD help you strengthen breathing muscles, get more oxygen, and breathe with less effort. Here are two examples of breathing exercises you can begin practicing. Work up to 5 to 10 minutes, three to four times a day. Pursed-lip breathing: Use pursed-lip breathing while exercising. If you have shortness of breath, try slowing your rate of breathing and focus on breathing out through pursed lips. Diaphragmatic breathing: When you haveCOPD, shortness of breath may be a daily and unwelcome fact of life. Perhaps your doctor is urging you to enter apulmonary rehabilitationprogram to help you manage your disease better. Some pulmonary rehab programs use breathing devices, called inspiratory muscle trainers, that train patients to increase the pressure that breathing muscles have to generate per breath. Pulmonary rehab programs also teach patients exercises to strengthen their arms and legs. Typically, patients do aerobic and isotonic exercises, the latter designed to strengthen muscles. It's good to be careful when exercising with COPD, but remember that shortness of breath doesn't always mean you should stop altogether. Ask your doctor about when you should stop exercising and rest. Here are other exercise precautions: Exercises to avoid when you have COPD: Ask your doctor whether exercises like weightlifting,jogging, andswimmingare OK for you to do. If you have any of these signs or symptoms, stop your COPD exercise program right away. Sit down, and keep your feet raised while resting. If you don't feel better right away, call 911. Even if you do feel better, make sure you tell your doctor right away about any of these symptoms: If you have COPD, your respiratory muscles burn 10 times as many calories as those of other people. That’s because it takes so much energy just for you to breathe. On top of that, you may takemedicationsor havedepressionthat can reduce your appetite. A healthy diet can help manage your condition and help you feel better. Here are three reasons why: 1. If you don't get enough calories and are underweight: 2. If you'reoverweight: 3. When you have COPD, a diet full of healthy foods: When you have COPD, you may need to make some diet changes. But always do this under the guidance of a registered dietitian or otherhealth careprovider who can prepare anutritionaction plan tailored to your exact needs. Here are a fewCOPD and dietguidelines to get started: Eat a variety of healthy foodssuch as vegetables, fruits, whole grains, dairy products, and proteins. High-fiber foods are especially important. They help with digestion, control blood sugar levels, reducecholesterol levels, and can help control weight. Drink plenty of water.Not only does it help prevent gas when you eat high-fiber foods, but water helps thin mucus so you cancoughit up easier. Most people need six to eight 8-ounce glasses of water a day. Check with your doctor, though, because some health conditions require that you limit your fluids. Choose decaffeinated and noncarbonated beverages. Limit alcohol, which can interact with medications, can slow breathing, and may make it harder tocoughup mucus. Ask about certain foods.Certain nutrients, such as omega-3 fatty acids, may help reduceinflammationand improve lung function. Ask your doctor. Avoid salt.Salt (sodium) makes your body retain water, which increases swelling. This makes it harder to breathe. To get less salt, try to: Avoid foods that cause gas orbloating.Everyone knows how uncomfortable that full-stomachfeeling is. And it may make it harder to breathe. To ease gas or bloating, avoid foods and drinks such as: Avoid empty foods.Junk foods such as chips and candy don't provide any nutritional value. If you need to gain weight,choose more high-protein, high-calorie foods such as cheese, peanut butter, eggs, milk, and yogurt. Ask about nutritional supplements to increase the number of calories andnutrientsyou get each day. If you have COPD, mealtime can feel like a chore. Try these tips for easier eating: Conserve energy: Breathe easier at mealtime: Stimulate your appetite: To help monitor and maintain a healthy weight if you have COPD: SOURCES: American Association for Respiratory Care: "Exercising Safely with COPD." Cleveland Clinic: "COPD Exercise and Activity Guidelines," "Diaphragmatic Breathing," "COPD Exercise Precautions," "Nutritional Guidelines for People With COPD." University of Michigan Health System: "Breathing Exercises." American Association for Respiratory Care: "Eating Right: Tips for the COPD Patient." National Institutes of Health: "A Meaty, Salty, Starchy Diet May Impact Chronic Lung Disease." Medscape: "Omega-3 Fatty Acids May Improve Lung Function in COPD." University of Alabama: "Nutrition and COPD." National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute.  Check your COPD risk. What is the top cause of this condition? 7 early warning signs. 10 exercises for people With COPD. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.