Children can get thecoronavirusthat causes COVID-19, but their symptoms tend to be milder than adults’ symptoms, and in many cases, they may have no symptoms at all. Their risk of getting COVID-19 is about the same asthat ofadults.The risk can be drastically reduced if your child receives the COVID-19 vaccine. COVID-19 may cause more serious illness in children who have certain medical conditions and in babies younger than 12 months. In some cases, children developmultisystem inflammatory syndrome(MIS-C), which is a serious condition that requires medical attention (more below). Some very simple and effective ways to help prevent your child from catching or spreading COVID-19 are: You’ll also want to reassure your child if they’re anxious about any changes in their routines, like staying home from school or not seeing friends face-to-face. Watch for unusual worry or sadness, trouble eating or sleeping, and attention problems. Talk to them about what’s happening, and reassure them that most cases of COVID-19 are mild. Your children will pick up cues from you, so it’s important that you stay calm, too. When children and teens get sick with COVID-19, their symptoms appear to be similar to adults. There have been fewer hospitalizations among people in the U.S. under the age of 19. Research shows that over 90% of children who get sick have very mild to moderate cold-like symptoms that include: Some children and teens have been hospitalized with a condition called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) or pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome (PMIS). Doctors are still learning about it, but they think it’s linked to COVID-19. Symptoms include fever, belly pain, vomiting, diarrhea,rash,headache, and confusion. They’re similar to those oftoxic shock syndromeorKawasaki disease, which causes inflamedbloodvessels in children. Serious problems are rare. Get medical help right away if your child shows any of these symptoms: Some children may be at higher risk for more severe disease if they have other medical conditions such as: The CDC has recommended that everyone 6 months and older should get the COVID-19vaccineto protect against the coronavirus. The Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are approved for ages 6-months and older. The CDC also recommends a booster with the bilvalent vaccine 2 months after their most recent vaccination to cover the more current variants of coronavirus. But getting the vaccine does not ensure that your child will not get infected. It’s important to do everything you can to protect your child and the rest of your family from disease. Here are ways to cut their risk of illness: Wear masks indoors in public.People can spread the coronavirus even when they don’t have symptoms or before symptoms start. To slow the spread, the CDC says everyone over the age of 2 should wear a mask indoors when they’re in a public place if they have not been fully vaccinated or if the level of COVID-19 spreading in your community is high. The CDC has a tool to help you track theCOVID-19 community level where you live. Fit is important, so buy masks that are sized for small faces. Try on masks at home so children have time to get used to them. Make sure your child doesn’t touch the mask while wearing it. Wash hands often.All kids should wash their hands: Soap and water are best. Make sure they lather the backs of their hands, between their fingers, and under their nails for at least 20 seconds (the same amount of time it takes to sing “Happy Birthday” two times). If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-basedhandsanitizer that contains at least 60% alcohol. Stay home, and no playdates in person.When levels of coronavirus are high in your area,it’s important to limit close contact with others to reduce the spread of the disease. Stay home as much as possible, and avoid public places like shopping malls and movie theaters. Don’t have playdates or sleepovers. Your child may not seem sick, but they may still have the virus and can pass it to others. Keep your kids away from others who are ill.And if your child has cold-like symptoms, keep them home. Teach them to cough and sneeze into a tissue that they toss after each use, or into their arm or elbow instead of their hands. Clean your home regularly.Disinfect high-touch surfaces like toilets, sinks, doorknobs, light switches, handles, smartphones, tablets, and TV remotes every day. You can use most regular household cleaners, or make your own by mixing a quarter cup of bleach with a gallon of water. If your child has a favorite stuffed animal or plush item, wash it frequently at the highest possible temperature. Take care if you get sick.A new mom who tests positive for COVID-19 or thinks she could have it might choose to temporarily stay away from her baby in order to lower the chances of spreading the virus. Talk about the pros and cons with your medical team. If you go this route and still want tobreastfeed, you can pumpbreastmilk and have a healthy caregiver feed your child. If you might be sick but don’t want to separate from yourbaby, take extra steps to avoid spreading the virus.Wash your handsoften, and wear aface maskwhen you’re 6 feet away or closer, including when nursing. The number of children with COVID-19 has dramatically spiked with the Omicron variant. To ensure their safety, it’s important to have your kids fully vaccinated against COVID-19. To keep your young ones safe: There’s one FDA-approved COVID-19 treatment for certain kids under 12 years old. It’s a shot calledremdesivir(Veklury). It’s for children 28 days of age and older who weigh about 7 pounds at least, and are either: Remdesivir can cause side effects. There’s a chance it could raise a child’s levels ofliver enzymes, which may be a sign ofliverinjury. It could also trigger anallergic reaction, which may include signs like: Get medical help right away if you think your child is having side effects. Dial 911 if they’re havingtrouble breathing. Paxlovidis used to treat adults and children 12 and older (weighing at least 88 pounds) who have mild-to-moderate COVID-19 and high risk of the disease becoming severe. Paxlovid should be taken as soon as possible after you’re diagnosed and within 5 days of your symptoms starting. Remdesivir and Paxlovid are not substitutes for the COVID-19 vaccine in children who are eligible. Your child should still get the COVID vaccine if they are 6-months or older. If your child has symptoms that you think might be COVID-19, call a doctor. They can tell you what to do and whether the doctor needs to see your child in person. Don’t just show up at the doctor’s office -- call first. In the event that your child has COVID-19, they’ll likely stay at home to recover. Your child should rest and drink plenty of fluids. Never useaspirinin children younger than 19. It increases their risk of a serious condition called Reye’s syndrome. You may want to try giving your child an over-the-counter pain reliever that’s a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory (NSAID), such asibuprofenornaproxen.Acetaminophenmay be a safer option. To make sure the rest of the family doesn’t get sick: Separate them.Your child should stay away from the other people in your home -- ideally, in a specific room and bathroom. They shouldn’t snuggle or kiss family pets, either. If your child has COVID-19, they should wear a face mask when they’re around other people. If that makes it harder for them tobreathe, or they get upset, you can instead wear one when you’re with them. Don’t share personal items with them.This includes things like drinking glasses, towels, and bedding. Clean and disinfect constantly.If your sick child is old enough to clean high-touch areas like phones, doorknobs, and toilets themselves, let them. Otherwise, do it yourself but wear a mask. Track their symptoms.Call your doctor right away if your child has trouble breathing, has chest pressure or pain, or seems confused. Keep them isolated even if they seem better.Your child can be around other people once they have had a full day with no fever -- without the use of fever-reducingmedication-- their other symptoms have improved, and it’s been at least 5 days since they got sick. They need to keep wearing a mask when they’re around other people for another 5 days, for a total of 10 days. If they can’t wear a mask, they should remain isolated for a full 10 days. SOURCES: FDA: “Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Approves First COVID-19 Treatment for Young Children.” CDC: “Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Approves First COVID-Treatment for Young Children,” “COVID-19 Vaccine Boosters,” “Breastfeeding and Caring for Newborns If You Have COVID-19.” World Health Organization: “Coronavirus Q&A.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “2019 Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19),” “Cloth Face Coverings for Children During COVID-19,” “COVID-19 and Multi-System Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.” Pediatrics: “Epidemiological Characteristics of 2143 Pediatric Patients With 2019 Coronavirus Disease in China,” March 21, 2020. CDC: “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” Quarantine and Isolation,” “COVID-19 Vaccines for Children and Teens,” “Types of Masks and Respirators,” “Guidance for COVID-19 Prevention in K-12 Schools,” “About COVID-19.” UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19),” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Considerations in children,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Coronavirus in Babies and Kids.” UC Davis Health: “9 things to know about COVID-19 and the Delta variant as kids return to school.” Cleveland Clinic: “The Delta Variant and Children: How Concerned Should Parents Be?” Children’s Hospital Los Angeles: “The Delta Variant and Children: What Parents Need to Know.” American Family Physician: “Aspirin Use in Children for Fever or Viral Syndromes.” UpToDate: “COVID-19: Clinical manifestations and diagnosis in children.” New Hampshire Department of Health and Human Services: “How to Properly Make and Use Sanitizers & Disinfectants.” Here’s what you need to know. Lingering symptoms after weeks or months? Get the facts. From headaches to moodiness, symptoms you should know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.