If you havehigh blood pressure, it's a good idea to take extra care to protect yourself during thecoronavirus (COVID-19)outbreak. There is a possibility that having high blood pressure might put you at greater risk for severe illness and death with COVID-19. High blood pressure is the most commonly shared preexisting condition among those hospitalized. Having hypertension can almost double the risk of severe COVID illness or death. Other health conditions include cancer, diabetes, or lung disease. Why people with high blood pressure may be at higher risk for coronavirus is not known. One possibility could be in the relationship between hypertension and the immune system.  Long-term health conditions and aging weaken your immune system so it's less able to fight off the virus. Almost two-thirds of people over 60 have high blood pressure. Another possibility is that the higher risk comes not from high blood pressure itself, but from certain drugs used to treat it --ACE inhibitorsand angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs). This theory may come from research that suggests these types of medications weaken the body’s immune cells. But other large studies found no ties between the use of these drugs and how severe COVID-19 is. Still other research suggests that they may make COVID-19 less severe. There’s also no proof that people have less severe illness after stopping them. Stopping these medications may make heart and kidney disease worse. It can also raise your risk of death. The American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association recommend that you keep taking your high blood pressure medicine as prescribed. If you don’t, it could raise your risk for aheart attackorstroke, putting you in the hospital just as coronavirus cases are coming in. Whilepneumoniais the most common complication of the virus, it can also damage the cardiovascular system. High blood pressure damages arteries and reduces the flow of blood to your heart. That means your heart has to work harder to pump enough blood. Over time, this extra work can weaken your heart to the point where it can't pump as much oxygen-rich blood to your body. Coronavirus can also damage the heart directly, which can be especially risky if your heart is already weakened by the effects of high blood pressure. The virus may cause inflammation of the heart muscle calledmyocarditis, which makes it harder for the heart to pump. If you also have plaque buildup in your arteries, the virus may make those plaques more likely to break apart and cause a heart attack. Past studies have shown that people with heart disease who get a respiratory illness likethe fluor earlier types of coronavirus are at higher risk for a heart attack. Everyone needs to take precautions to prevent coronavirus. People with high blood pressure and other health conditions need to be extra careful. The CDC offers this advice: SOURCES: American College of Cardiology: "ACC Clinical Bulletin Focuses on Cardiac Implications of Coronavirus (COVID-19)," "COVID-19 Clinical Guidance for the Cardiovascular Care Team," "HFSA/ACC/ACA Statement Addresses Concerns Re: Using RAAS Antagonists in COVID-19." American Heart Association: "How High Blood Pressure Can Lead to a Heart Attack," "What heart patients should know about coronavirus." CDC: “COVID-19,” "Hypertension Prevalence and Control Among Adults: United States, 2015 – 2016," "Transcript - CDC Media Telebriefing: Update on COVID-19," “COVID-19: How to Protect Yourself & Others,” “Use of Cloth Face Coverings to Help Slow the Spread of COVID-19." European Society of Cardiology: "Position Statement of the ESC Council on Hypertension on ACE-Inhibitors and Angiotensin Receptor Blockers." Istitute Superiore di Sanita (ISS): "Report sulle caratteristiche dei pazienti deceduti positivi a COVID-19 in Italia Il presente report è basato sui dati aggiornati al 17 Marzo 2020." Journal of the American College of Cardiology: "Cardiovascular considerations for patients, health care workers, and health systems during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic." Mayo Clinic: "Myocarditis." Science Media Centre: "Expert reaction to questions about high blood pressure, diabetes, and ACE inhibitor drugs, and risk of COVID-19 infection." The Lancet: "Are patients with hypertension and diabetes mellitus at increased risk for COVID-19 infection?" UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Issues related to kidney disease and hypertension.” European Heart Journal: “Association of hypertension and antihypertensive treatment with COVID-19 mortality: a retrospective observational study.” Bimil Shah, M.D.,Livongo: "Tracking COVID-19’s Effect on the Nation’s High Blood Pressure, Aug 31, 2020." American Association for the Advancement of Science: “Common Blood Pressure Drugs Leave Immune Cells Weak Against Bacteria.” BMJ Journals: “Hypertension as an independent risk factor for severity and mortality in patients with COVID-19: a retrospective study.” Here’s what you need to know. Lingering symptoms after weeks or months? Get the facts. From headaches to moodiness, symptoms you should know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.