Editor's note: For the latest updates on the 2023 coronavirus outbreak, see ournews coverage. COVID-19is a disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 that can trigger what doctors call a respiratory tract infection. In early 2020,  the World Health Organization identified SARS-CoV-2 as a new type ofcoronavirus. The outbreak quickly spread around the world.  It can affect your upper respiratory tract (sinuses, nose, and throat) or lower respiratory tract (windpipe andlungs). It spreads the same way other coronaviruses do, mainly through person-to-person contact. Infections range from mild to deadly. SARS-CoV-2 is one of seven types of coronavirus, including the ones that cause severe diseases like Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) and sudden acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). The other coronaviruses cause most of the colds that affect us during the year but aren't a serious threat to otherwise healthy people. Is there more than one strain of SARS-CoV-2? Yes, the COVID-19 virus continues to mutate and there are several variants that are now spreading. Some are more contagious as well as more deadly than the original virus. Throughout the pandemic, scientists have kept a close eye on variants like: How long will the coronavirus last? There's no way to tell how long the pandemic will continue. There are many factors, including the public's efforts to slow the spread, researchers' work to learn more about the virus, their search for a treatment, and the success of the vaccines. The main symptoms include: The virus can lead topneumonia, respiratory failure, heart problems, liver problems,septic shock, and death. Many COVID-19 complications may be caused by a condition known as cytokine release syndrome or a cytokine storm. This is when an infection triggers your immune system to flood your bloodstream with inflammatory proteins called cytokines. They can kill tissue and damage your organs. In some cases, lung transplants have been needed. If you notice the following severe symptoms in yourself or a loved one, get medical help right away: Strokes have also been reported in some people who have COVID-19. Remember FAST: If you're infected, symptoms can show up in as few as 2 days or as many as 14. It varies from person to person. According to researchers in China, these were the most common symptoms among people who had COVID-19: Some people who are hospitalized for COVID-19 also have dangerous blood clots, including in their legs, lungs, and arteries. What to do if you think you have it If you live in or have traveled to an area where COVID-19 is spreading: For more information about COVID-19,see our FAQ. How do I know if it's COVID-19, a cold, or the flu? Symptoms of COVID-19 can be similar to abad coldor the flu. Your doctor will suspect COVID-19 if: Cold vs. Flu vs. Allergies vs. COVID-19 COVID-19 (can range from moderate to severe)  ­­ Is COVID-19 worse than the flu? Unlike the flu, a lot of people aren't immune to the coronavirus, and because it has been mutating with new strains. If you do catch it, the virus triggers your body to make things called antibodies. Researchers are looking at whether the antibodies give you protection against catching it again. The coronavirus has caused higher rates of severe illness and death than the flu. But the symptoms themselves can vary widely from person to person. Is COVID-19 seasonal like the flu? While scientists hoped initially thathigher temperaturesand humidity levels might help slow the spread of the coronavirus, that was not the case. Experts advise caution and say thorough public health efforts have more influence than weather on the spread.  Also, past flu pandemics have happened year-round. Researchers aren't sure what caused it, and investigations as to its origin are ongoing. There's more than one type of coronavirus. They're common in people and in animals including bats, camels, cats, and cattle. SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19, is similar to MERS and SARS. They all came from bats. Anyone can get COVID-19, and most infections are mild. The older you are, the higher your risk of severe illness. You also a have higher chance of serious illness if you have one of these health conditions: Conditions that could lead to severe COVID-19 illness include: Some children and teens who are in the hospital with COVID-19 have an inflammatory condition that doctors are calling multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children. Doctors think it may be linked to the virus. It causes symptoms similar to those of toxic shock and of Kawasaki disease, a condition that causes inflammation in kids' blood vessels. If you have preexisting mood disorders, you may be at high risk for hospitalization or death but not necessarily severe COVID-19. That said, having schizophrenia is the biggest risk factor for besides age for COVID mortality. Those with schizophrenia spectrum disorders are prone to metabolic syndrome, which includes increased blood pressure, high blood sugar, and is associated with systemic inflammation. All of which is exacerbated by COVID. Mood and anxiety disorders were not connected to the higher risk, but people living with mental health conditions may have certain symptoms that can interfere with their ability to care for themselves and be engaged in their health decisions. This can make it hard to effectively follow health behaviors like maintaining social distancing or staying in quarantine to reduce the spread of the infection. Moreover, people with mental health and mood disorders are also more likely to have conditions like diabetes and heart problems which are major risk factors for severe COVID-19. There are also several socio-economic reasons why preexisting mood disorders can increase your chances of hospitalization and death if you get COVID-19.This includes: How does COVID-19 spread? COVID-19 mainlyspreads from person to person. People release respiratory fluids during exhalation (e.g., quiet breathing, speaking, singing, exercise, coughing, sneezing) in the form of droplets across a spectrum of sizes. These droplets carry viruses and transmit infection. The largest droplets settle out of the air rapidly, within seconds to minutes. The smallest very fine droplets, and aerosol particles formed when these fine droplets rapidly dry, are small enough that they can remain suspended in the air for minutes to hours. The risk of transmission is greatest within three to six feet of an infectious source where the concentration of these very fine droplets and particles is greatest. If you breathe them in or swallow them, the virus can get into your body. Some people who have the virus don't have symptoms, but they can still spread the virus. While less likely, you can also get the virus from touching a surface or object the virus is on, then touching your mouth, nose, or possibly your eyes.Most viruses can live for several hours on a surfacethat they land on. OVID-19 can last for several hours on various types of surfaces: That's why it's important to wash or sanitize your hands regularly and disinfect surfaces to get rid of the virus. Some dogs and cats have tested positive for the virus. A few have shown signs of illness. There's no evidence that humans can catch this coronavirus from an animal, but it appears it can be passed from humans to animals. What is community spread? Doctors and health officials use this term when they don't know the source of the infection. With COVID-19, it usually refers to someone who gets the virus even though they haven't been exposed to someone who has COVID-19. In February 2020, the CDC confirmed a COVID-19 infection in California in a person who had not traveled to an affected area or been exposed to someone with the disease. This marked the first instance of community spread in the U.S. It's likely that person was exposed to someone who was infected but didn't know it. This type of occurrence has been happening with the variants as well. How fast is it spreading? The number of people infected or re-infected by COVID-19 changes every day. See ournews storyfor the latest updates on this developing story. How contagious is the coronavirus? The transmission rate is relatively high. Early research has estimated that one person who has it can spread it to between 2 and 3.5 others. By comparison, one person who has the seasonal flu will pass it to between 1.1 and 2.3 others. The Omicron variant, which is now the dominant strain of COVID-19 in the United States, is highly contagious and spreads faster than the original virus. The CDC reports there is evidence COVID-19 can be transmitted if you get within 6 feet of someone who is infectious for a total of 15 minutes throughout a day. We can work to lower the transmission rate by wearing high-quality face masks when we can't stay 6 feet away from others,washing handsoften, keeping common surfaces clean, limiting contact with other people, and getting vaccinated. Can coronavirus be transmitted through groceries, packages, or food? You're much more likely to get COVID-19 from another person than from packages, groceries, or food. If you're in ahigh-risk group, stay home and use a delivery service or have a friend shop for you. Have them leave the items outside your front door, if you can. If you do your own shopping, wear a high-quality face mask and try to stay at least 6 feet away from other shoppers. Wash your handsfor at least 20 seconds before and after bringing things into your home. The coronavirus can linger on hard surfaces, so clean and disinfect countertops and anything else your bags has touched. You can wipe down plastic, metal, or glass packaging with soap and water if you want. There's no evidence that anyone has gotten COVID-19 from food or food containers. Call your doctor or local health department if you think you've been exposed and have symptoms like: Home testing has advanced considerably since the beginning of the pandemic and you can readily test yourself.Otherwise, testing facilities are readily available in most areas. While some require an appointment, others are simply drive-up. Home testing kits are also widely available. A swab test is the most common testing method. It looks for signs of the virus in your upper respiratory tract. You or the person giving the test puts a swab up your nose to get a sample from the back of your nose and throat. That sample usually goes to a lab that looks for viral material, but some areas may have rapid tests that give results in as little as 15 minutes. If there are signs of the virus, the test is positive. A negative test could mean there is no virus or there wasn't enough to measure. That can happen early in an infection. It usually takes 24 hours to get results, but the tests must be collected, stored, shipped to a lab, and processed. The FDA has granted authorizations for several at-home nasal swab tests, which you collect yourself and express ship back to the lab for analysis as well as at-home rapid tests. You can buy these over the counter in pharmacies, at retail stores, or online. At-home tests are also available for free at some local health departments or federally qualified health centers. A swab test can only tell whether you have the virus in your body at that moment. But you may also consider taking anantibody testwhich can show whether you've ever been exposed to the virus, even if you didn't have symptoms. This is important in officials' efforts to learn how widespread COVID-19 is. In time, it might also help them figure out who's immune to the virus. The FDA is working with laboratories across the country to develop more tests. Getting vaccinated against COVID-19 is a key part of prevention. But you should also take these steps: There's no proof that herbal therapies and teas canprevent infection. COVID-19 preparation tips In addition to practicing the prevention tips listed above, you can: Can aface maskprotect you from infection? A mask is an added layer of protection for everyone, on top of vaccines and social distancing efforts. You can spread the virus when you talk or cough, even if you don't know that you have it or if you aren't showing signs of infection. It's important to wear a high-quality mask in a variety of situations: Wear a mask indoors in public places if you're in an area where there's a high or “substantial” amount of COVID spreading around. That goes for people 2 years old and up. If you have a chronic health condition or you're taking meds that weaken your immune system, wear a mask in indoor public places even if you're fully vaccinated. Do this unless your doctor tells you otherwise. In general, you don't need to wear a mask outside, where it's harder for the coronavirus to spread. But if COVID-19 cases are high in your area, consider wearing one in crowded outdoor places and for outdoor get-togethers that involve close contact with people who aren't fully vaccinated. Anyone should wear a face mask if they're sick and around other people or animals, even at home. Caregivers should use them when cleaning and disinfecting a sick person's bedroom or bathroom. If you need to call 911, put on a mask before medical help arrives. Some people shouldn't wear masks: What are the different types of face masks? You have several options: Cloth masksare washable and reusable. The best ones have multiple layers of breathable fabric and fit snugly over your nose and mouth. It's a good idea to buy ones that come with a nose wire and are made with fabric that can block light. Disposable masks, also called surgical masks, are also widely available. Choose ones that have several layers of non-woven material. Pick a size that fits properly over your nose and mouth and comes with a nose wire. Don't wear one that has gaps around the sides of your face or nose, or has wet or dirty material. N95 respirator masksfit tightly around your face and filter out 95% or more of the smallest particles in the air. It's fine to buy a basic, disposable N95 respirator. Choose one that's high quality and says “NIOSH Approved” on the label. Is it safe to travel during a pandemic? Crowded places can raise your chances of getting COVID-19. It’s important to check the status of COVID-19 transmissions in the area where you travel before you go and take the necessary precautions while there. A few questions may help you decide whether it'ssafe to travel: If you choose to travel, stay away from sick people. Wash your hands often, and try not to touch your face. Wear a high-quality cloth face mask when you are around other people. How can you help stop the spread of the coronavirus? Because thevirus spreads from person to person, it's important to limit your contact with other people as much as possible. and avoid large gatherings. Most states and cities have lifted restrictions but this doesn't mean the virus is gone. Continue to follow safety practices such as wearing a high-quality cloth face mask in public places and washing your hands. The following terms have now become commonplace: Precautions should still be followed even if you are vaccinated. The CDC recommends that everyone 6 months and older be vaccinated. There are fourvaccines, which have been granted FDA approval; Pfizer BioNTech, Moderna, Novavax, and Johnson & Johnson. Pfizer and Moderna have developed bivalent boosters, which are so named because they protect against both the original virus that causes COVID-19 and the Omicron variant BA.4 and BA.5 Top health experts have a preference for the type of vaccine that you choose. They recommend that you choose a vaccine made with mRNA (like the ones from Pfizer and Moderna) or DNA like Noravax rather than the J&J vaccine, which is made differently. The recommendation is endorsed by the CDC and comes from the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, which reviewed the latest evidence on the effectiveness, safety, and rare side effects of the available vaccines. That said, receiving any COVID-19 vaccine is better than being unvaccinated, experts say. Booster shots of the Pfizer and Moderna vaccines are recommended for everyone 5 years and older at least 2 months after you've gotten your first two doses. When it comes to boosters, you don't have to stick with same the vaccine you initially got. For example, if your initial doses came from Moderna, you can get a booster dose from Pfizer. COVID-19 vaccines were developed at an unprecedented speed, with testing in humans starting in March 2020. The FDA says that no corners were cut to allow for approval and that the inoculations are safe. The CDC has said it is safe forpregnantwomen and there's no evidence that antibodies formed from COVID-19 vaccination cause any problems with pregnancy. There's no specific treatment for COVID-19. People who get a mild case need care to ease their symptoms, like rest, fluids, and fever control. Take over-the-counter medicine for a sore throat, body aches, and fever. But don't giveaspirinto children or teens younger than 19. You might have heard that you shouldn't takeibuprofento treat COVID-19 symptoms. But the National Institutes of Health says people who have the virus can use nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) oracetaminophenas usual. Antibiotics won't help because they treat bacteria, not viruses. In January 2022, the FDA limited the use of two monoclonal treatments that previously were used to treat COVID-19 infections after it was found that they were not effective against the Omicron variant. These two monoclonal antibody treatments arebamlanivimabandetesevimab(administered together) and REGEN-COV (casirivimabandimdevimab).Sotrovimabis the only available monoclonal treatment with activity against the Omicron variant. Many clinical trials are underway to explore treatments used for other conditions that could fight COVID-19 and to develop new ones. A variety of steroid medications are being used including dexamethasone which is used to treat conditions such as arthritis, blood/hormone/immune system disorders, and allergic reactions. More studies on effectiveness are still being conducted. Is there a cure for the coronavirus? There's no cure yet, but researchers are working hard to find one. Every case is different. You may have mild flu-like symptoms for a few days after exposure, then get better. But some cases can be severe or fatal. Symptoms can also linger for weeks, even if they're mild. More than a third of people older than 18 who have signs of the virus aren't totally recovered 2 or 3 weeks later, according to a CDC survey. Fatigue and cough were the symptoms that were most likely to linger. Some other people who've had COVID-19 develop a condition similar to myalgic encephalomyelitis, also known as chronic fatigue syndrome. They may have brain fog, severe fatigue, pain, trouble thinking, or dizziness. What is the recovery rate for coronavirus? Scientists and researchers are constantly tracking COVID-19 infections and recoveries. But they don't have information about the outcome of every infection. Early estimates predict that the overallCOVID-19 recovery ratewill be between 97% and 99.75%. Can you get the coronavirus multiple times? Yes. This is another reason to stay vigilant against becoming infected and transmitting the virus. As with other coronaviruses that only causecolds, you have a period that you're immune, but that goes away over time. That also appears to be the case with this coronavirus. Immunity is estimated to last up to three months. Having COVID-19 usually results in antibodies which should help protect you from re-infection. But the virus continues to mutate and these changes can lead to new variants which allow the risk for re-infection. The CDC is investigating how often reinfections occur, who is at higher risk of reinfection, how soon reinfections take place after a previous infection, and the severity of reinfections compared with initial infections. Are coronaviruses new? Coronaviruses were first identified in the 1960s. Almost everyone gets a coronavirus infection at least once in their life, most likely as a young child. In the United States, regular coronaviruses are more common in the fall and winter, but anyone can come down with a coronavirus infection at any time. The symptoms of most coronaviruses are similar to any other upper respiratory infection, including arunny nose,coughing,sore throat, and sometimes a fever. In most cases, you won't know whether you have a coronavirus or a different cold-causing virus, such as a rhinovirus. You treat this kind of coronavirus infection the same way you treat a cold. Have there been other serious coronavirus outbreaks? Coronaviruses have led to two serious outbreaks: SOURCES: JAMA Psychiatry:“Association Between Mood Disorders and Risk of COVID-19 Infection, Hospitalization, and Death. A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis,” “Association of Psychiatric Disorders with Mortality Among Patients With COVID-19.” UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Management in adults,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Epidemiology, virology, clinical features, diagnosis, and prevention.” TuftsNow: “How the Body Battles COVID-19.” Thrombosis Research: “Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19.” European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control: “Disease background of COVID-19,” “Q&A on COVID-19.” World Health Organization: “Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public,” "Coronavirus Infections," “Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV),” “Naming the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and the virus that causes it,” “Novel Coronavirus(2019nCoV) Situation Report - 11,” "Novel Coronavirus(2019-nCoV) Situation Report - 22." “Q&A on coronaviruses (COVID-19)." “Q&A: Similarities and differences – COVID-19 and influenza,” “Draft landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines – 20 April 2020,” “Tobacco and waterpipe use increases the risk of suffering from COVID-19.” CDC: "2019 Novel Coronavirus (2019-nCoV), Wuhan, China,” “CDC Confirms Possible Instance of Community Spread of COVID-19 in U.S.,” "Coronavirus," “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” “Self-Testing,” “Omicron Variant: What You Need to Know,” “COVID-19 Vaccines for Children and Teens,” “CDC Endorses ACIP's Updated COVID-19 Vaccine Recommendations,” “Reinfection with COVID-19,” “Guidance for Wearing Masks,” “Types of Masks and Respirators.” National Science Foundation: “For unvaccinated, reinfection by COVID-19 is likely, study finds.” The Lancet:“Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study.” Elsevier: “Novel Coronavirus Information Center.” University of California, San Francisco: “How the New Coronavirus Spreads and Progresses – And Why One Test May Not Be Enough.” Harvard Health Publishing: “As coronavirus spreads, many questions and some answers,” “Coronavirus Resource Center.” Cleveland Clinic: “Frequently Asked Questions about Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” “Can You Get COVID-19 More Than Once?” National Institutes of Health: “NIH clinical trial of investigational vaccine for COVID-19 begins,” “COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines.” News release, National Institutes of Health. Journal of Virology: "Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus (MERS-CoV); Announcement of the Coronavirus Study Group." Journal of the American Medical Association News: "French Researchers: For Now, Middle Eastern Coronavirus Not Likely to Cause a Pandemic." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Upper Respiratory Infection (URI) or Common Cold." Occupational Safety and Health Administration: “COVID-19.” National Science Review: “On the origin and continuing evolution of SARS-CoV-2.” World Health Organization: “Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public: Myth busters,” “Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” “Tracking SARS-CoV-2 variants.” EClinical Medicine: “The coronavirus 2019-nCoV epidemic: Is hindsight 20/20?” CDC: “CDC Confirms Possible Instance of Community Spread of COVID-19,” “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)," “Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.” The New England Journal of Medicine: “Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1,” “Large-Vessel Stroke as Presenting Feature of Covid-19 in the Young.” American Stroke Association: “Stroke Symptoms.” National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health: “In the News: Coronavirus and 'Alternative' Treatments.” Yale School of Medicine: “The Ins and Outs of COVID-19 Testing. Who is being tested? What are tests looking for? When might we have a vaccine?” American Family Physician: “Aspirin Use in Children for Fever or Viral Syndromes.” European Medicines Agency: “EMA gives advice on the use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatories for COVID-19.” The BMJ: “Covid-19: ibuprofen should not be used for managing symptoms, say doctors and scientist.” Medscape: “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Treatment & Management,” “Sudden Loss of Taste and Smell Should Be Part of COVID-19 Screen,” “Fauci to Medscape: 'We're All In It Together and We're Gonna Get Through It.'” The Hospitalist: “CDC expert answers top COVID-19 questions.” FDA: “Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: Daily Roundup April 1, 2020,” “Emergency Use Authorization,” “Letter of Authorization: Dr. Rick Bright, Ph.D.,” “Understanding Unapproved Use of Approved Drugs 'Off Label,'” “Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Alerts Consumers About Unauthorized Fraudulent COVID-19 Test Kits,” “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Frequently Asked Questions,” “Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: Serological Tests.” Nature Reviews: “The COVID-19 vaccine development landscape.” National Academies Press: “Rapid Expert Consultation on SARS-CoV-2 Survival in Relation to Temperature and Humidity and Potential for Seasonality for the COVID-19 Pandemic.” MedRxiv: “The Novel Coronavirus, 2019-nCoV, is Highly Contagious and More Infectious Than Initially Estimated.” Pathogens: “SARS-CoV-2 and Coronavirus Disease 2019: What We Know So Far.” Hartford HealthCare: “How to Avoid COVID-19 at the Supermarket.” Commonwealth of Massachusetts: “COVID-19 Essential Services FAQs.” Emerging Infectious Diseases: “Case-Fatality Risk Estimates for COVID-19 Calculated by Using a Lag Time for Fatality.” Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health Center for Health Security: “Serology-based tests for COVID-19.” Mayo Clinic: “COVID-19 (coronavirus) vaccine: Get the facts,” “Reinfection rates of omicron and why people need to take this seriously.” American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Common Questions About COVID-19 and Cancer: Answers for Patients and Survivors.” News release, Abbott. News release, AstraZeneca. Delta News Hub: “Delta expands safety commitment by requiring all customers to wear face coverings across travel.” News release, FDA. Intermountain Healthcare: “What's the difference between a cold, the flu, seasonal allergies and coronavirus?” Boston Children's Hospital: “COVID-19 and a serious inflammatory syndrome in children: Unpacking recent warnings.” KidsHealth/Nemours: “Kawasaki Disease.” World Organisation for Animal Health: “Questions and Answers on the COVID-19.” FDA letter. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: “Symptom Duration and Risk Factors for Delayed Return to Usual Health Among Outpatients with COVID-19 in a Multistate Health Care Systems Network – United States, March-June 2020.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.