If you have COVID-19,your symptomsmay be relatively mild and manageable at home. That’s true for most people. But if you’re older or have another illness such asdiabetesorheart disease, you’re more at risk for the serious form ofCOVID-19. Some people -- about 1 in 6 -- will have complications, including some that are life-threatening. Many of these complications may be caused by a condition known as cytokine release syndrome or a cytokine storm. This is when an infection triggers your immune system to flood your bloodstream with inflammatory proteins called cytokines. They can kill tissue and damage your organs, including your lungs, heart, and kidneys. COVID-19 complications may include the following. When you haveacute respiratory failure, your lungs might not pump enough oxygen into your blood or might not take enough carbon dioxide out. Both of these problems can happen at the same time. Acute respiratory failure has been the leading cause of death for those who have died of COVID-19. Some who catch the new coronavirus get severepneumoniain both lungs. COVID-19 pneumonia is a serious illness that can be deadly. When you have pneumonia, the air sacs in your lungs become inflamed, making it harder to breathe. Images of very ill COVID-19 patients’ lungs show them filled with fluid, pus, and cell debris. In those cases, patients’ bodies weren’t able to transfer oxygen to the blood to keep their systems working properly. Acute respiratory distress syndrome(ARDS) was one of the most common complications of COVID-19. With ARDS, the lungs are so severely damaged that fluid begins to leak into them. As a result, the body has trouble getting oxygen into the bloodstream. You may need mechanical help to breathe -- such as aventilator-- until your lungs recover. Most seriously ill patients run the greatest risk of liver damage. It's unclear whether the virus harms the liver or if it happens for another reason,  but besides the lungs, the liver usually suffers the biggest injuries from COVID-19. Acute liver injury andliver failureare life-threatening complications. (“Acute” means it happens suddenly.) Many hospitalized with COVID-19 have developed heart problems, including arrhythmias and high levels of other cardiac ailments. But it’s not clear whether the virus itself affected patients’ hearts, or if the damage happened simply because the illness caused such stress on their bodies overall. COVID-19 also may cause cardiac problems that last long after people have recovered from the coronavirus infection. A secondary infection means that you get an infection unrelated to the first problem you had. In this case, it means someone with COVID-19 gets infected with something else. Sometimes, a person fighting off, ­or recovering from, a virus gets infected by bacteria. Strep andstaphare common culprits. This can be serious enough to raise the risk of death. This is not a common complication, but if it happens, it’s serious. If your kidneys stop working properly, doctors will start treatment to stop the damage. You might getdialysis(in which a machine filters your blood) until your kidneys get back to working normally. But sometimes, the damage doesn’t heal and people get chronickidney disease, which would need to be managed long-term. Sepsishappens when your body’s reaction to an infection misfires. The chemicals released into your bloodstream to battle the illness don’t trigger the right response, and instead your organs are damaged. If the process isn’t stopped, you can go into what’s called septic shock. If yourblood pressuredrops too much, septic shock can be fatal. When you have disseminated intravascular coagulation, or DIC, the body’s blood-clotting response doesn’t work right. Abnormal clots form, which can lead tointernal bleedingor organ failure. DIC is not uncommon among those who have died or COVID. A condition called disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) causes your body’s blood-clotting response to work differently than it should. Unusual clots form, which can lead to internal bleeding or organ failure and death. Those hospitalized with COVID have been found to be more likely to develop clots than those hospitalized with the flu. Some were in patients’ legs (deep vein thrombosis or DVT), lungs (pulmonary embolism or PE), or arteries. But none of the patients had DIC. COVID-19-associated coagulopathy (CAC) is a life-threatening condition caused by the virus. It’s marked by different protein levels in your blood than the ones caused by DIC. A number of children and teens have been hospitalized with a condition called multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) or pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome (PMIS) It is linked to the new coronavirus. Symptoms include fever, belly pain, vomiting, diarrhea, rash, headache, and confusion. They’re similar to those of toxic shock syndrome or Kawasaki disease, which causes inflamed blood vessels in children. Some people who’ve had COVID-19 develop a condition similar to chronic fatigue syndrome. They may have a brain fog, severe fatigue, pain, trouble thinking, or dizziness. This is an extremely rare condition, but it’s one COVID-19 researchers are watching. In rhabdomyolysis, your muscles break down and tissue dies. As cells fall apart, a protein called myoglobin floods your bloodstream. If your kidneys can’t flush it out of your blood quickly enough, it can overwhelm them and cause death. SOURCES: UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Management in adults,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children.” TuftsNow: “How the Body Battles COVID-19.” Cureus: “Rhabdomyolysis as a Presentation of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease.” Thrombosis Research: “Incidence of thrombotic complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19.” American Society of Hematology: “COVID-19 and Coagulopathy: Frequently Asked Questions.” World Health Organization: “Q and A on coronavirus.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: “Persons Evaluated for 2019 Novel Coronavirus -- United States, January 2020,” Feb. 14, 2020. American Lung Association: “Pneumonia.” Mount Sinai Health System: “Patients with COVID-19 Have Distinct Markings in Lungs, Study Finds.” Radiology: “Chest CT Findings in Coronavirus Disease-19 (COVID-19): Relationship to Duration of Infection,” published online, Feb. 20, 2020. The Lancet, Jan. 24, 2020. American Lung Association: “Learn About ARDS.” Liver International: “Liver injury during highly pathogenic human coronavirus infections,” published online, March 14, 2020. Mayo Clinic: “Acute Liver Failure.” JAMA: “Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019 Novel Coronavirus-Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China,” published online, Feb. 7, 2020. JAMA: “Characteristics and Outcomes of 21 Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19 in Washington State,” published online, March 19, 2020. European Heart Journal: “Coronaviruses and the cardiovascular system: acute and long-term implications,” published online, March 18, 2020. Travel Medicine and Infectious Disease: “Clinical, laboratory and imaging features of COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis,” published online, March 13, 2020. Frontiers in Microbiology, published online, June 23, 2017. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Respiratory Failure.” Intensive Care Medicine: “Clinical predictors of mortality due to COVID-19 based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China,” published online, March 3, 2020. American Kidney Fund: “Acute Kidney Injury.” Mayo Clinic: “Sepsis.” The Lancet: “Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China,” Feb. 15, 2020. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation.” Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis, published online, Feb. 19, 2020. Emerging Infectious Diseases, published online, March 20, 2020. Cleveland Clinic: “Rhabdomylosis.” KidsHealth/Nemours: “Kawasaki Disease.” Medscape: “Fauci to Medscape: ‘We’re All In It Together and We’re Gonna Get Through It.’ ” CDC: “Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.” Here’s what you need to know. Lingering symptoms after weeks or months? Get the facts. From headaches to moodiness, symptoms you should know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.