This sleep disorder can cause serious health problems for kids. When her son was in preschool, Cynthia Chin-Lee remembers teachers saying he would fall asleep during playtime. At age 10,  Joshua was impossible to rouse in the mornings, saying, "I need to sleep 10 more minutes. Leave me alone." Joshua seemed tired, had bags under hiseyes, and wasn't doing well in school, explains Chin-Lee, 53, a manager at a software company in Palo Alto, Calif. Chin-Lee's husband had a theory: Maybe their son hadsleep apnea, a condition with which her husband had recently been diagnosed. Obstructive sleep apnea(OSA) is a sleep-related breathing disorder affecting more than 18 million adults and 2% to 3% of children of all ages, even newborns, according to the National Sleep Foundation. It seems to run in families, and kids who have enlargedtonsilsand/oradenoids(lymph nodes in the throat behind the nose) have a higher risk of developing OSA. Other factors include being obese, having a small jaw or midface, or a larger-than-usualtongue, being exposed totobaccosmoke, and having less muscle tone (such as in children with Down syndrome,cerebral palsy, and/or neuromuscular disorders), explains Dennis Rosen, MD, associate medical director of the Center for PediatricSleep Disordersat Boston Children's Hospital. Sleep apnea, derived from the Greek word for "without breath," is a serious condition. Breathing temporarily pauses during sleep for more than 10 seconds in adults and longer than two breath cycles in children, and this can happen up to 70 times an hour. Oxygen levels in thebloodplummet, and the body responds as if choking. Sometimes young children outgrow OSA as their throats get larger and airways stiffen, says Rosen. Those with large tonsils and adenoids may need surgery (adenotonsillectomy), which typically cures 80% to 90% of children, says Rosen. Joshua was diagnosed with OSA and needs additional treatment since tonsil surgery was unsuccessful. His parents are consulting another sleep specialist. "I'm relieved I have a diagnosis," says Chin-Lee. "A lot of people, and probably a lot of kids, havesleep apneaand don't know it." Think your child might haveobstructive sleep apnea? Look for these symptoms, Rosen says. Find more articles, browse back issues, and read the current issue of"WebMD the Magazine." SOURCES: Cynthia Chin-Lee, Palo Alto, Calif. Dennis Rosen, MD, associate medical director, Center for Pediatric Sleep Disorders, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Mass. American Academy of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery: "Fact Sheet: Pediatric Sleep-Disordered Breathing/Obstructive Sleep Apnea." Medscape Reference: "Childhood Sleep Apnea." Rosen, D.Current Opinion in Pulmonary Medicine,November 2011. Bonuck, K.Pediatrics, March 5, 2012. News release, Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Medline Plus: "Snoring Tots May Develop Behavioral Problems Later." Weber, S.International  Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology,published online March 17, 2012. American Sleep Apnea Association: "Children’s Sleep Apnea." Medscape: "Childhood Sleep Apnea." Know your myths from your facts. What do they say about you? You may need a sleep study. Which type do you  have? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.