Most people who get COVID-19, the disease caused by acoronaviruscalled SARS-CoV-2, will have only mild illness. But what exactly does that mean? Mild COVID-19 cases still can make you feel lousy. But you should be able to rest at home and recover fully without a trip to the hospital. Here’s what to expect and how to take care of yourself. Scientists and researchers are constantly tracking infections and recoveries. But they have data only on confirmed cases, so they can’t count people who don’t get COVID-19 tests. Experts also don’t have information about the outcome of every infection. On average about 98.2% of known COVID-19 patients in the U.S. survive, but each individual’s chance of dying from the virus will vary depending on their age, whether they have an underlying health condition and whether they are vaccinated. While people who are vaccinated can still get infected, these “breakthrough” cases are rare, and vaccines dramatically reduce severe illness and death. Not everyone who catches COVID-19 will notice symptoms. If you do get them, they may show up 2 to 14 days after your infection. And those symptoms can vary from one person to the next. One of the most common signs is afever, which for most adults is 100.4 F or higher. It means your body is trying to fight off an invader. About 50% of people who become ill have a drycough. That’s the kind that doesn’t bring up anymucusorphlegm. But about a third have a cough withmucus. You also might feel verytired. Less commonly, your throat may be sore and your head might ache. Your muscles and joints could hurt, and you might getchills,nausea, vomiting, ordiarrhea. Some people who had COVID-19 said they had trouble taking deep breaths and felt like they had a tight band wrapped around their chest. Others have likened the illness to a badcold. Still, others said it was the sickest they’d ever felt. Loss of smell and taste have been reported in many cases. Some patients have skin rashes and darkened toes, called “COVID toes.” You might feel short of breath as if you’d just run to grab a ringing phone. If so, call your doctor to ask about what you should do. Early research suggested that it could take 2 weeks for your body to get over a mild illness or up to 6 weeks for severe or critical cases. Recovery varies for different people, depending on things like your age and overall health. Fatigue, headache, and trouble breathing were the symptoms most likely to linger. CDC guidelines say that if you’ve been sick, you shouldisolate yourselfat home until all of these things are true: Regardless of when you end isolation, until at least day 11: A small percentage of people who have the new coronavirus need to stay in the hospital to get help breathing. It may depend on things like your age and your overall health. This might last 2 weeks or more. Some people who have severe COVID-19 get a complication calledacute respiratory distress syndrome(ARDS), which can damage yourlungsand make it very hard to breathe. If you’re severely ill, you might need treatment in an intensive care unit (ICU). Many patients who spend time in the ICU lose weight and strength. Your medical team will work with you to treat or manage these symptoms, including exercises to boost your strength. Long COVID happens when a range of symptoms linger after recovery, and affect your quality of life. Experts estimate that 13 million Americans have long COVID. You may notice symptoms like: If you’ve noticed symptoms of long COVID, or you begin to feel worse and develop new symptoms, call your doctor. After you recover from COVID-19, it’s likely that you’ll have some protection from reinfection. But reinfection does happen. The CDC continues to learn more about: There’s no cure for COVID-19, although if you have to stay in the hospital, some medicines may shorten your recovery. Some of the things you can do to speed your healing are similar to how you might take care of the flu or a bad cold. Eat healthy foods.If you feel like eating, fuel your body with thevitaminsand nutrients it needs to get better. Limit sugary or highly processed foods like cookies and sodas. If you don’t have an appetite, you don’t need to try to force food down. Drinks lots of fluids.Do this even if you don’t feel like eating.Wateris always a good pick. Lower your fever.Takeacetaminophenoribuprofenif you have a temperature or body aches. Be careful not to take more than a total of 3,000 milligrams every 24 hours, except in the case of pediatric patients. That includes acetaminophen alone as well as inmedicationslike cold and flu pills and syrups. Rest.Know that you’ll probably feel better eventually. If your symptoms do get worse, call your doctor. SOURCES: J. Randall Curtis, MD, A. Bruce Montgomery, American Lung Association Endowed Chair in Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Harborview Medical Center, University of Washington, Seattle. World Health Organization: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) Situation Report -- 41,” “Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” “WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 -- 24 February 2020.” UpToDate: “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19),” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Critical care issues,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Clinical features,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Outpatient evaluation and management in adults,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Epidemiology, virology, and prevention.” National Health Service (UK): “Cough.” Harvard Health Publishing: “Coronavirus Resource Center.” Johns Hopkins University & Medicine: “COVID-19 Map.” Our World in Data: “Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) – Statistics and Research.” Emerging Infectious Diseases: “Case-Fatality Risk Estimates for COVID-19 Calculated by Using a Lag Time for Fatality.” CDC: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Caring for someone at home,” “When You Can be Around Others After You Had or Likely Had COVID-19,” “CDC Updates and Shortens Recommended Isolation and Quarantine Period for General Population,” “Reinfection.” Cleveland Clinic Health Essentials: “Here’s the Damage Coronavirus (COVID-19) Does to Your Lungs.” World Health Organization: “Clinical management of severe acute respiratory infection (SARI) when COVID-19 disease is suspected.” BMJ: “Recovery from intensive care.” The Lancet: “Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study.” The New England Journal of Medicine: “Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients -- Preliminary Report.” American Lung Association: “The Lingering Effects of Long COVID.” Here’s what you need to know. Lingering symptoms after weeks or months? Get the facts. From headaches to moodiness, symptoms you should know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.