COVID-19 is a respiratory disease caused by acoronavirus. That means it can affect yourlungs, throat, and nose. For people who haveasthma, infection with the virus could lead to anasthma attack,pneumonia, or other seriouslung disease. One small study shows thatasthmadoesn’t raise your chances of getting infected with the coronavirus that causes COVID-19. But if you do get sick, your symptoms could be worse than other people’s because you already havetrouble breathing. People with conditions such as asthma are encouraged to get the COVID-19 vaccine when it is available to them. There’s no treatment for COVID-19. But there are steps you can take to protect yourself and your loved ones including getting vaccinated. Common COVID-19 symptoms include: Symptoms of asthmainclude: The two conditions share some warning signs. If you have shortness of breath, how can you tell what’s causing it? Pay attention to your other symptoms. Early studies have found that 83% to 99% of people with COVID-19 have a fever, although it might be mild. What should you do if you havecoronavirus and asthmasymptoms? You may worry if you have asthma and get signs of acold,allergies, or other respiratory problems. Talk to your doctor if you have: Call your doctor or 911 right away if: Getting vaccinated can help prevent infection. Keep taking your asthma medicine.Stay homeas much as possible. That lowers your chance of coming into contact with the virus. It’s a good idea to have a 30-day supply of food, nonprescriptiondrugs, and other household goods on hand. Your doctor,pharmacist, andinsurancecompany can help you figure out what you need for an emergency supply of prescription medication. Here are some other tips: If you’re mildly sick, stay home. Always use a tissue to cover your cough orsneeze. Throw that tissue away after you use it. Stay away from people in your house who are sick. If possible, they should stay in a separate room and use another bathroom until they’re better. If they can’t, disinfect any common spaces the ill person uses. You should both wear masks when around each other. Apeak flowdiary can help you keep track of your asthma symptoms. Ask your doctor or pharmacist about how you can get a peak flow meter, a small device that measures how fast air comes out of your lungs. Write down each day’s readings, how often you use rescue medications and any symptoms you have. This can tell you and your medical team whether your breathing might be getting worse or if your symptoms could be COVID-19. To prevent complications of coronavirus and asthma: Corticosteroid drugs can slow yourimmune system. But experts say the benefits outweigh any risks for people who have asthma. The most important thing is to keep control of your condition. Keep taking your medicine. Never stop or change medications without talking to your doctor first. Rescue drugs likebronchodilatorsdon’t affect your immune system. If you have an asthma flare and need to use medicine, an inhaler is best. A nebulizer mightspread the virusthrough the air if you use it while you’re sick. If you must use a nebulizer, do it in a room by yourself. Children who have asthma may be more likely to have moresevere symptomsof any respiratory infection, including COVID-19. Keep your child at home, have them wear masks (if they are over the age of 2) in public, and limit their contact with other people. Remind them to wash their hands often. Help them keep toys and electronics clean. Keep an eye on your child’s symptoms, and call their doctor if you have concerns. SOURCES: UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).” National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Asthma.” Asthma UK: “Coronavirus (COVID-19).” Cleveland Clinic: “Peak Flow Meter.” Medscape: “Asthma Patients: Stay on Steroids in Face of COVID-19, Say Experts.” American Lung Association Each Breath Blog: “Asthma and COPD: COVID-19 Myth Busting with Dr. Juanita Mora.” Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America: “Coronavirus (COVID-19): What People With Asthma Need to Know.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Coronavirus in Babies and Children.” Asthma Canada: “Asthma & Coronavirus (COVID-19) Q&A.” CDC: “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): People with Asthma and COVID-19, How It Spreads, Clean & Disinfect, Protect Yourself, Symptoms,” “Asthma: Triggers.” “Interim Clinical Guidance for Management of Patients with Confirmed Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19).” World Health Organization: “Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public: Myth busters,” “Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public.” American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: “Important information About COVID-19 for those with asthma.” European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: “Clinical characteristics of 140 patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan, China.” The New England Journal of Medicine: “Aerosol and Surface Stability of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1.” Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America: “Asthma Action Plan.” Potential long-term health effects of uncontrolled asthma. See when you should call 911 or go to the ER. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.