COVID-19 is a respiratory condition caused by a coronavirus. Some people are infected but don’t notice any symptoms (doctors call that being asymptomatic). Most people will havemild symptomsand get better on their own. But some will have severe problems, such astrouble breathing. The odds of more serious symptoms are higher if you’re older or have another health condition likediabetesor heart disease. Here’s what to look for if you think you might have COVID-19. The most common things people who become ill with COVID-19 have include: These symptoms can start anywhere from 2 to 14 days after you’re in contact with the virus. Call a doctor or hospital right away if you have any of these issues: If you have any of these, you need medical care as soon as possible, so call yourdoctor’s office or hospital before you go in. This will help them prepare to treat you and protect medical staff and other people. Strokes have also been reported in some people who have COVID-19. Remember FAST: The antiviral drugremdesivir(Veklury) has been approved by the FDA for use in hospitalized people.Molnupiravir(Lagevrio) andnirmatrelvir with Ritonavir(Paxlovid) have been given emergency use authorization for treating COVID-19 and should be given orally as soon as possible. The FDA has also authorized health care providers to use medications that aren’t yet approved for COVID-19, such as monoclonal antibodies, in some special cases. COVID-19 can also cause problems including: Some doctors have reported rashes tied to COVID-19, including purple or blue lesions on children’s toes and feet. Researchers are looking into these reports so they can understand the effect on people who have COVID-19. Researchers say kids have many of the same COVID-19 symptoms as adults, but they tend to be milder. Some children may be asymptomatic, but they can still spread the virus. Common symptoms in children include: Some children and teens who are in the hospital with COVID-19 have an inflammatory syndrome that may be linked to the coronavirus. Doctors call it pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome (PMIS). Symptoms include a fever, a rash, belly pain, vomiting, diarrhea, and heart problems. It’s similar to toxic shock or to Kawasaki disease, a condition in children that causes inflammation in blood vessels. Get tested for COVID-19 if: Your regular body temperature may be higher or lower than someone else’s. It also changes throughout the day. Doctors generally consider a fever in an adult to be anything over 100.4 F on an oral thermometer and over 100.8 F on a rectal thermometer. If you think you’ve come into contact with the virus, or if you have symptoms, isolate yourself and check your temperature every morning and evening for at least 10 days. Keep track of the readings. A fever is the most common symptom of COVID-19, but it’s sometimes below 100 F. In a child, a fever is a temperature above 100 F on an oral thermometer or 100.4 F on a rectal one. Most people with COVID-19 have a dry cough they can feel in their chest. If you have milder symptoms like a fever, shortness of breath, or coughing: Dyspnea is the word doctors use for shortness of breath. It can feel like you: You should monitor your oxygen levels, and if they dip into the 80s, contact your doctor. If your face and/or lips get a bluish tint, call 911 right away. Cold vs. Flu vs. Allergies vs. COVID-19 COVID-19 (can range from moderate to severe) SeveralCOVID-19 vaccinesare available, and they’re the best way to protect yourself and those around you unless your doctor advises otherwise. Full vaccination lowers your chances of getting COVID-19. The most accessible vaccines in the U.S. are: Talk with your doctor before getting the vaccine if you have immune system issues. The CDC recently said there’s a clinical preference for people to get an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (either the Pfizer or Moderna one) or Novavax's protein-based vaccine over the Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine. This recommendation came after the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) discussed the latest data on vaccine effectiveness, vaccine safety, rare adverse side effects, and U.S. vaccine supply. But the ACIP also said that any vaccine is better than no vaccine and the Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine is still an option. In addition, in the fall of 2022, CDC recommended a bivalent mRNA COVID-19 vaccine booster dose for persons aged 5 years and older to help combat the Omicron variant. The shot is administered at least 2 months after completing the primary series or after receipt of a monovalent booster dose. The CDC also approved a bivalent booster for children aged 6 months–4 years who completed the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine primary seriesAnd an updated (bivalent) Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine also became available on December 9, 2022, for children aged 6 months–4 years to complete the primary series. Until you’re vaccinated, be sure to take these steps to prevent COVID-19:  If you’re taking care of someone who’s sick, follow these steps to protect yourself:  SOURCES: UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Epidemiology, virology, clinical features, diagnosis and prevention,” “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).” Medscape: “Kidney Complications in COVID-19 Send Hospitals Scrambling.” Global Radiology CME: “COVID-19 Presenting with Syncope.” Iranian Red Crescent Medical Journal: “Frequent Convulsive Seizures in an Adult Patient With COVID-19: A Case Report.” Consul General of the Official Colleges of Podiatrists, Spain: “COVID-19 Compatible Case Register.” World Health Organization: “Q&A on coronaviruses (COVID-19),” “Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).” CDC: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and you,” “Symptoms of coronavirus disease 2019,” “Symptoms,” “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).” “Symptoms of COVID-19,” “Treatments Your Healthcare Provider Might Recommend If You Are Sick,” “COVID-19 In Children and Teens,” “Test For Current Infection,” “What To Do If You Are Sick,” “Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine: Vaccine Preparation and Administration Summary,” “Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine: Vaccine Preparation and Administration Summary,” “Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine (Johnson & Johnson): Vaccine Preparation and Administration Summary,” “Interim Clinical Considerations for Use of COVID-19 Vaccines Currently Authorized in the United States,” “CDC Endorses ACIP’s Updated COVID-19 Vaccine Recommendations,” “Most Children and All Teens Can Get COVID-19 Vaccines,” “Quarantine and Isolation,” “Types of Masks and Respirators.” University of Alabama at Birmingham: “Sorting out symptoms of COVID-19, influenza, colds and allergies.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Fever in Adults,” “Shortness of Breath.” Loma Linda University Health: “Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19).” American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Shortness of Breath or Dyspnea.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Shortness of Breath.” American Academy of Ophthalmology: “Coronavirus Eye Safety.” The Lancet Gastroenterology and Hepatology: “Liver injury in COVID-19: management and challenges.” National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases” “Cold, Flu, or Allergy?” The New England Journal of Medicine: “Large-Vessel Stroke as Presenting Feature of Covid-19 in the Young.” American Stroke Association: “Stroke Symptoms." Boston Children’s Hospital: “COVID-19 and a serious inflammatory syndrome in children: Unpacking recent warnings.” Nemours/KidsHealth: “Kawasaki Disease,” “Fevers.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report: “Coronavirus Disease 2019 in Children – United States, February 12-April 2, 2020.” Hartford Health Care: “30 Percent of People With COVID-19 Show No Symptoms: Here’s Where They Carry It.” MANA Medical Associates: “What Are The Symptoms of COVID-19?”  Here’s what you need to know. Lingering symptoms after weeks or months? Get the facts. From headaches to moodiness, symptoms you should know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.