There are several reasons why some people'steethgrow in crooked, overlapping, or twisted. Some people's mouths are too small for theirteeth, which crowds theteethand causes them to shift. In other cases, a person's upper and lower jaws aren't the same size or are malformed, resulting in either anoverbite, when there is excessive protrusion of the upper jaw, or an under bite, when the lower jaw protrudes forward causing the lower jaw and teeth to extend out beyond the upper teeth. Learn more aboutwhat causes an overbite, as well as how to tell the difference between anunderbite vs overbite. Most oftencrooked teeth, overbites, and underbites are inherited traits just as the color of youreyesor size of your hands. Other causes ofmisaligned bitesare early loss of baby or adult teeth; improper fit of dental restorations (for example, fillings or crowns);gingivitis(gum disease); undue pressure on the teeth and gums; misalignment of the jaw after an injury; tumors of the mouth or jaw; or commonoral health problems in childrensuch as thumb sucking,tonguethrusting,pacifieruse beyond the age of three, or prolonged use of a bottle. Crooked teeth and misaligned bites can: While you can see for yourself if teeth are crooked, your dentist can determine if the problem warrants treatment. Your dentist will look for the following signs: Your dentist will usually refer you to an orthodontist -- a dentist who specializes in the diagnosis and treatment of crooked teeth and misaligned jaws. The orthodontist will likely takeX-rays, photographs of your face, and teeth impressions to determine if and what type of treatment is needed. X-rays provide information on the position of your teeth and roots and if any teeth have yet to come through the gums. Special cephalometrics or panoramic X-rays show the relationship of the teeth to the jaws and the jaws to the head. Your orthodontist may also want to take regular photographs of your face to further examine the relationship between the teeth, jaws, and head. Finally, impressions may be made of your teeth. This is done by having you bite down on a soft material that is later used to create an exact copy of your teeth. Once a diagnosis is made, your orthodontist can decide the best treatment for your teeth or misaligned bite. For some people, a removable retainer (to stabilize the new position of teeth) will be all that's needed to correct the problem. In very rare cases, removal of one or more teeth may be required if overcrowding is the main problem. For most people, braces are necessary to correct the problem. In rare and extreme cases, such as an extreme overbite or underbite, an operation may be necessary. Learn more aboutcorrecting an overbitewithout braces. SOURCE: American Dental Association. Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.