Crystal meth is the common name forcrystal methamphetamine, a strong and highly addictive drug that affects the central nervous system. There is no legal use for it. It comes in clear crystal chunks or shiny blue-white rocks. Also called “ice” or “glass,” it's a popular party drug. Usually, users smoke crystal meth with a small glass pipe, but they may also swallow it, snort it, or inject it into a vein. People say they have a quick rush of euphoria shortly after using it. But it's dangerous. It can damage your body and cause severe psychological problems. Methamphetamineis a man-made stimulant that's been around for a long time. During World War II, soldiers were given meth to keep them awake. People have also taken the drug to loseweightand easedepression. Today, the only legal meth product is a tablet for treating obesity andattention deficit hyperactivity disorder(ADHD). It's rarely used and is available only by prescription.  <!--td {border: 1px solid #ccc;}br {mso-data-placement:same-cell;}--> Find out the differences betweenAdderall and methamphetamines, as well asamphetamines vs. methamphetamines. Crystal meth is made with the ingredientpseudoephedrine, which is found in many cold medicines. It helps ease congestion. Because it's used to make meth, the federal government closely regulates products with this ingredient. Most of the crystal meth used in this country comes from Mexican “superlabs.” But there are many small labs in the U. S. Some are right in people's homes. Making meth is a dangerous process because of the chemicals involved. Along with being toxic, they can cause explosions. The powerful rush people get from using meth causes many to get hooked right from the start. When it's used, a chemical called dopamine floods the parts of thebrainthat regulate feelings of pleasure. Users also feel confident and energetic. A user can become addicted quickly and soon finds they will do anything to have the rush again. As they continue to use the drug, they build up a tolerance. That means they need higher doses to get the same high. The higher the dose, the higher the risks. Get more information onhow meth use affects the body. Have you noticed changes in someone you care about? Consider these signs: <!--td {border: 1px solid #ccc;}br {mso-data-placement:same-cell;}--> Read more on thesigns a loved one is addicted to meth. Meth addiction is one of the hardest drug addictions to treat, but it can be done. If you know someone with the problem, don't try to help them by yourself. Users need a professional counselor or drug treatment program. To find resources in your area, use the Treatment Locator created by theSubstance Abuse & Mental Health Services Administration(SAMHSA), or call 800-662-HELP. <!--td {border: 1px solid #ccc;}br {mso-data-placement:same-cell;}--> Get additional information onmeth addiction treatment options. SOURCES: National Institute on Drug Abuse: “Methamphetamine Abuse and Addiction,” “Drug Facts: Methamphetamine,” “Methamphetamine,” “Easy-to-Read Drug Facts.” Partnership for Drug-Free Kids: “Crystal Meth.” Drug Enforcement Administration: “Drug Fact Sheet: Methamphetamine.” Foundation for a Drug-Free World: “The Truth About Crystal Meth and Methamphetamine.” News release, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. The Meth Project: “How to Spot a User,” “Find Help.” NIDA for Teens: “Drug Facts: Methamphetamine (Meth).” Prescription and over-the-counter medications. Know when to seek medical attention. Changes that happen in the body and the mind. Causes, symptoms, and treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.