Cushing's syndromeis a hormonal disorder caused by high levels of the hormonecortisolin your body. It’s also known as hypercortisolism. Cortisol comes from your adrenal glands, which sit on top of your kidneys. It helps your body: But when you have too much cortisol, it can throw off your body's other systems. Most cases of Cushing's syndrome can be cured, though it may take some time for your symptoms to ease up. The condition is more common in women than in men. It's most often seen in people ages 25-40. You can get Cushing's syndrome when there’s too much cortisol in your body for too long. The most common cause is related tomedicationscalledglucocorticoids, also commonly known as corticosteroids,steroids(for example, prednisone). These prescription steroids are used for conditions such asasthma,rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, or after anorgan transplant. They’re powerful anti-inflammatory medications. Taking too much, for too long, can lead to Cushing's syndrome. Although rare, you can also get Cushing’s syndrome from injectable steroids, such as repeated shots forjoint pain,bursitis, andback pain. Steroidskincreams, used foreczemaand otherskin problems, are less likely to cause Cushing’s syndrome, but it can happen. A tumor in your pituitary gland found at the base of thebrain, or a tumor in the adrenal glands, can also prompt your body to make too much cortisol, which can lead to Cushing’s. ACTH is a hormone that regulates cortisol. In rare cases, an ACTH-secreting tumor causes Cushing’s syndrome. This kind of tumor can form in an organ that doesn’t naturally produce ACTH, but because of the tumor, it begins to make a lot of it. These tumors can be cancerous or noncancerous. They’re usually found in thelungs,pancreas,thyroid, or thymus gland. It's not usually a condition that's passed along in families. In some rare cases, though, people have it because a problem in their genes makes them more likely to get tumors on their glands. Your case might be different than someone else's, but when the disease is full-blown, common symptoms are: Your skin could become thin, heal slowly, andbruiseeasily. You might get purple or pinkstretch marksall over your body, especially on your belly, thighs, arms, and chest. Your bones may get weak. Everyday movements like bending, lifting, or even getting out of a chair can cause backaches or breaks in your ribs orspine. Children with Cushing's syndrome are usually very heavy, what doctors callobese, and tend to grow slowly. It might take several appointments to settle on your diagnosis. When you go to your doctor, they'll do aphysical examand ask you questions. Your doctor will probably also recommend some of these tests to help screen for Cushing’s syndrome if they suspect you have it: 24-hour urinary free cortisol test.This common test collects yoururinefor 24 hours to measure how much cortisol is in it. Dexamethasone suppression test.You’ll take a low-dose steroid pill at 11:00 p.m. and then take a blood test in the morning to see how much cortisol your body still makes. Late-night salivary cortisol level.This test measures cortisol in yoursaliva. As the name suggests, these tests happen at night. If you have Cushing's syndrome, your doctor may refer you to a specialist who will do otherbloodtests or imaging scans to find out what's causing it.    The first thing your doctor will figure out is why you have too much cortisol. That will lead to how to treat your condition. Lifestyle changes Some lifestyle changes may help you manage your Cushing’s syndrome and stay healthier:  Cushing’s syndrome can cause serious health problems and even death if not treated. Problems may include:  Your symptoms and how long they'll last depend on: Most of the time Cushing’s syndrome can be treated and cured. If your Cushing's syndrome isn't curable, you'll want to look for ways to manage your weight gain, muscle weakness, and tiredness. Partner with your doctor on that, and tell your doctor how you're feeling. If you get depressed, it's important to get treated for that. Look for ways to connect online and in person with people who have experience with Cushing's syndrome. You can learn more about living with the condition, and meet other people who have it, in forums on theCushing’s Support & Research Foundationwebsite. SOURCES: Massachusetts General Hospital: "Cushing's Syndrome." Medscape: "Cushing Syndrome." National Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases Information Services: "Cushing's Disease." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Cushing's Syndrome Information Page." Urology Care Foundation: "Cushing's Syndrome." National Institutes of Health: “Cushing’s Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: “Cushing syndrome.”  © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.