Headache and nausea are common, and they can happen to you at the same time. Experts don’t know why they seem to be more likely in some people. But they do know things like dehydration, migraine, or other conditions can cause you to have headache and nausea together.   Migrainesare the kind of headaches that are most likely to make you nauseated. Of people who have migraines, 8 out of 10 have nausea with them too. Research shows women and anyone prone to motion sickness are more apt to have nausea with migraines. It’s not clear why women are more affected than men, but some experts think it’s linked to changes in hormones. You can also getmigraines during pregnancy.You might have pain on one side of your head and you may be nauseated. If you had migraines before you were pregnant, you may have fewer migraines while expecting. Or, you may notice an uptick in your number of headaches. Cyclic vomiting syndrome(CVS).This gastrointestinal (GI) disorder is linked tomigraine headaches,but it’s not a type of migraine. It happens most often in children, though kids usually outgrow them by the time they're teenagers. Some kids with CVS go on to have migraines as adults. You’re more likely to develop CVS as an adult if you have a history of migraines or long-term marijuana use, or you’re prone to motion sickness. Triggers include hot weather, physical or emotional stress, and sinus or respiratory infections. The main symptoms of CVS are sudden episodes of severe nausea and vomiting. These attacks can last for a few hours or several days. You might vomit several times an hour. Between episodes, you may feel healthy and have no symptoms. Doctors might misdiagnose your CVS as food poisoning or stomach flu. Your lifestyle affects your health in many ways. It can sometimes increase your risk for headache and nausea. Or, you may have a health condition you can’t help, but you might get headache and nausea if your condition isn’t well-managed or controlled. Here are some examples: Alcohol.If you overdo it, you can wake up with a severeheadacheand nausea, vomiting, or stomach pain. You might also be dizzy, really thirsty, and super sensitive to light and sound. Or you might have a headache andnauseaand vomiting when you’re withdrawing from alcohol. Caffeine.Whether you missed your morningcoffeeor you’re trying to cut down,caffeinewithdrawal is real. In addition to having a headache and nausea, you might feeltiredand have trouble concentrating. Nicotine.Too much can lead to a headache and nausea, with or without vomiting. You might also have a fast heartbeat, tightness in your chest, andtrouble breathing. Food poisoning.If you eat food that has certain germs in it, you may have headaches and nausea. Or, if you’re throwing up a lot from eating bad food, you might become dehydrated. That can also give you a headache. If you’re having headaches and nausea, see your doctor and tell them about your symptoms and what seems to trigger them. They’ll help you figure out what’s going on and help you choose the right treatment. Some common causes for headache and nausea are: Cold,flu,orstomachinfections. These illnesses can give you nausea and a bad headache. But unlike migraine headaches, you’ll usually have other symptoms, too, like arunny nose,diarrhea,chills, body aches, andfever.Which ones you get depend on the virus. COVID-19.The coronaviruses that cause COVID-19, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), and Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) have similar symptoms. They include headache, nausea, vomiting, fever, a cough, and trouble breathing. Low blood sugar.This can cause you to have nausea and headache. You mightfaintor be sweaty and confused. A headache can also be a sign of high blood sugar. Without treatment, high blood sugar in people with diabetes can lead to a serious condition called diabetic ketoacidosis. It can cause nausea and vomiting, weakness, confusion, or a coma. Medication withdrawal.Headache and nausea can happen when you stop taking some meds, especially common antidepressants like Lexapro, Prozac, and Zoloft. PMSand menstrual cycle.Changes in yourhormonelevels can cause nauseating headaches, which usually strike 2 days before, or in the first 3 days of, your period. You might have throbbing pain on one side of your head along with nausea and sensitivity to light. Preeclampsia.This condition is marked by high blood pressure during your pregnancy. You may not notice any symptoms. Or you could have severe headaches, vision changes, belly pain, nausea, or vomiting. You might pee less than usual. HELLP syndrome, a rarer condition linked to preeclampsia, can also cause you to have headache and nausea. Food poisoning.Germs that can lurk in your food may cause headaches and nausea. Or, if you’re throwing up a lot, you might become dehydrated. That can also give you a headache. High blood pressure.A severe headache, nausea, and vomiting are among the symptoms of very high blood pressure. You might hear this called a hypertensive crisis or malignant hypertension. High elevations.When you go to a much higher elevation than you’re used to, you might get altitude sickness, also known as mountain sickness. Headache and nausea are two of its symptoms. Glaucoma.High pressure inside your eyes can cause a headache along with nausea and vomiting. Some less common causes may include: Some things that might help include: SOURCES: National Headache Foundation: "American Migraine Study II: A Ten Year Report Card on the State of Migraine,” "Migraine," “Menstrual Migraine,” “Glaucoma." American Academy of Family Physicians, familydoctor.org: "Headaches," "Management of Cluster Headache,” “Food Poisoning." U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, womenshealth.gov: "Migraine." Vestibular Disorders Association: "Vestibular migraine." American Hearing Research Foundation: "Migraine Associated Vertigo." National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse: "Cyclic vomiting syndrome." Mayo Clinic: “Cluster headache,” “Hangovers,” “Anxiety disorders,” “Chronic kidney disease,” “Depression (major depressive disorder),” “Nicotine (Inhalation Route),” “Stress management,” “Hyperglycemia in diabetes,” “Hypertensive crisis: What are the symptoms?” “Preeclampsia,” “Hyponatremia.” Alcohol Health & Research World: “Treatment of Alcohol Withdrawal.” Brain Aneurysm Foundation: “Warning Signs/Symptoms.” University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences: “TRIUMPH Traumatic Brain Injury Guidelines.” Cancer.net: “Brain Tumor: Symptoms and Signs.” News release, Johns Hopkins Medicine. American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: “Allergy Headaches.” National Health Service (U.K.): “Hepatitis A,” “Addison’s disease.” National Kidney Foundation: “3 Early Warning Signs of Kidney Disease.” CDC: “Malaria,” “Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), “Scarlet Fever: All You Need to Know,” “Anthrax,” “Carbon Monoxide Poisoning,” “West Nile Virus.” American Migraine Foundation: “Menstrual Migraine,” “Pregnancy Often Leads to Changes in Migraines.” University of Rochester Medical Center: “Headaches in Early Pregnancy.” Anxiety and Depression Association of America: “Headaches.” Primary Care Companion: Journal of Clinical Psychiatry: “The Link Between Depression and Physical Symptoms.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Conditions We Treat: Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo (BPPV),” “Shigella Infections.” Northwell Health: “Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS).” National Capital Poison Control Center: “Food Poisoning.” StatPearls: “Malignant Hypertension.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Colorado Tick Fever,” “Toxic Shock Syndrome,” “Dengue Fever.” Fairview Health Services: “Black Widow Spider Bite.” European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology: “ESHRE Guideline for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Endometriosis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Altitude Sickness,” “Acoustic Neuroma.” Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: “Fifth Disease.” Cedars-Sinai: “HELLP Syndrome.” Victoria State Government Better Health Channel: “Kidneys – medullary cystic kidney disease.” UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Clinical features.” Frontiers in Neurology: “Giving Researchers a Headache – Sex and Gender Differences in Migraine.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Symptoms and Causes of Cyclic Vomiting Syndrome.” What aura looks like, triggers, and more. Get the truth about migraine. Could pot ease your pain? Test your knowledge of triggers, types, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.