A cystic hygroma is a rare type ofcystthat babies can get, usually in their head or neck, if their lymphatic system gets blocked while it’s growing. (This system helps filter out harmful things, including germs.) Doctors often find cystic hygromas before ababyis born. Only one in 8,000 babies is born with this kind ofcyst. Some of them may also have certain birth defects. So if yourbabyhas a cystic hygroma, your doctor will probably suggest tests to check for other problems. But some babies born with a cystic hygroma are healthy. Sometimes these cysts go away on their own. If not, it’s important to get surgery to remove a cystic hygroma so it doesn’t harm nearby areas of the body, become infected, or make yourbabyuncomfortable as they grow. Symptoms of a cystic hygroma depend on where and how big it is. The growth may make it hard for nearby organs and other body parts to work the way they should. Innewbornbabies, a cystic hygroma looks like a bulge under theskin, which may be slightly blue. Babies born with this type of cyst often have a hard time eating and may grow more slowly than those without cystic hygromas. If a cystic hygroma is near the throat, your baby may havetrouble breathing. These cysts can become infected. Left untreated, the cystic hygroma can harm nearby bones andteeth. The cystic hygroma will get bigger as your baby grows, and it may grow quickly if the cyst becomes infected or there is bleeding inside it. Both a baby’s genes and their environment in the womb can cause problems with the way their lymphatic system grows. This is how cystic hygromas form. It may happen on its own or with genetic conditions such as Turner, Down, or Noonan syndromes. When adults get a cystic hygroma, it can be due to trauma or a past respiratory infection. But it’s often not clear what caused the cyst. It may even disappear duringpregnancy. When you’re pregnant, your doctor may find your baby’s cystic hygroma during a routineultrasound. These cysts are usually found by the 20th week of pregnancy. You may also notice it after your baby is born or even later in your child’s life. If you find out while you’re pregnant that your baby has a cystic hygroma, the doctor will probably recommend genetic testing to see if there are other problems. These can include: You’ll also have frequent ultrasounds to watch for changes in the cyst and any complications. The doctor will likely plan for you to give birth by C-section at 38 weeks. Find a hospital where you have access to both neonatal intensive care and pediatric surgeons. The doctor can help you choose one. If your child has signs of a cystic hygroma after they’re born, they may get tests including chest X-ray, ultrasound, and an MRI orCT scanto diagnose the cyst. Doctors use surgery to remove a cystic hygroma. If parts of it are left behind, there’s a 15% chance it will come back. Though they don’t work as well as surgery, there are other options, such as: A cystic hygroma can cause you to make too much or too little amniotic fluid, which can put your unborn baby at risk. Many times, it causes a miscarriage. A baby born with a cystic hygroma can have other complications. As a parent, you may want to get support through groups focused on this condition, such as the nonprofit Birth Defect Research for Children and the Lymphatic Education and Research Network. SOURCES: National Institutes of Health: “Cystic Hygroma.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Cystic Hygroma.” The Fetal Medicine Foundation: “Cystic Hygroma.” Kaiser Permanente: “Prenatal Ultrasound Findings: What Is a Cystic Hygroma?” Emory University School of Medicine: “Cystic Hygroma.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.