One of the steps your doctor may recommend to lower your high blood pressure is to start usingthe DASH diet. DASH stands for Dietary Approaches to StopHypertension(high blood pressure). The diet is simple: In research studies, people who were onthe DASH dietlowered theirblood pressurewithin 2 weeks. Another diet -- DASH-Sodium -- calls for cutting back sodium to 1,500 milligrams a day (about 2/3 teaspoon). Studies of people on the DASH-Sodium plan lowered their blood pressure as well. The DASH dietcalls for a certain number of servings daily from various food groups. The number of servings you require may vary, depending on how many calories you need per day. You can make gradual changes. For instance, start by limiting yourself to 2,400 milligrams of sodium per day (about 1 teaspoon). Then, once your body has adjusted to the diet, cut back to 1,500 milligrams of sodium per day (about 2/3 teaspoon). These amounts include all sodium eaten, including sodium in food products as well as in what you cook with or add at the table. DashDiet Tips The DASH diet suggests getting: Grains:7-8 daily servings Vegetables:4-5 daily servings Fruits:4-5 daily servings Low-fat or fat-free dairy products:2-3 daily servings Meat, poultry, and fish:2 or less daily servings Nuts, seeds, and dry beans:4-5 servings per week Fats and oils:2-3 daily servings Sweets:try to limit to less than 5 servings per week When you're trying to follow ahealthy eatingplan, it helps to know how much of a certain kind of food is considered a "serving." One serving is: SOURCES: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "Lowering Your Blood Pressure With DASH." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "What is the DASH Eating Plan?" FamilyDoctor.org: "The DASH Diet: Healthy Eating to Control Your Blood Pressure." These 13 foods can help get your numbers in check. Simple upgrades to your daily routine can make a difference. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.