Yes.Childhood depressionis different from the normal "blues" and everyday emotions that children go through as they develop. Just because a child seems sad doesn't necessarily mean they have significantdepression. But if the sadness becomes persistent or interferes with normal social activities, interests, schoolwork, or family life, it may mean they have a depressive illness. Keep in mind that whiledepressionis a serious illness, it’s also a treatable one. Thesymptoms of depressionin children vary. The condition is often undiagnosed and untreated because symptoms are passed off as normal emotional and psychological changes. Early medical studies focused on "masked"depression, where a child's depressed mood was evidenced by acting out or angry behavior. While this does happen, particularly in younger children, many children display sadness or low mood similar to adults who are depressed. The primarysymptoms of depressionrevolve around sadness, a feeling of hopelessness, and mood changes. Signs andsymptoms of depressionin children include: Not all children have all of these symptoms. In fact, most will show different symptoms at different times and in different settings. Although some children may continue to do reasonably well in structured environments, most kids with significantdepressionwill have a noticeable change in social activities, loss of interest in school, poor academic performance, or a change in appearance. Children may also begin using drugs or alcohol, especially if they are over age 12. Although relatively rare in youths under 12, young children do attemptsuicide-- and may do so impulsively when they are upset or angry. Girls are more likely to attempt suicide, but boys are more likely to actually kill themselves when they make an attempt. Children with a family history of violence,alcohol abuse, or physical or sexual abuse are at greater risk for suicide, as are those with depressive symptoms. Up to 3% of children and 8% of adolescents in the U.S. have depression. The condition is significantly more common in boys under age 10. But by age 16, girls have a greater incidence of depression. Bipolar disorderis more common in adolescents than in younger children. Butbipolar disorder in childrencan be more severe than in adolescents. It may also happen with, or be hidden by,attention deficit hyperactivity disorder(ADHD),obsessive compulsive disorder(OCD), orconduct disorder(CD). As in adults, depression in children can be caused by any combination of things that relate to physical health, life events, family history, environment, genetic vulnerability, and biochemical disturbance. Depression is not a passing mood, nor is it a condition that will go away without proper treatment. Children with a family history of depression are also at higher risk of depression. Children who have parents with depression tend to have their first episode of depression earlier than children whose parents don’t have the condition. Children from chaotic or conflicted families, or children andteenswho abuse substances like alcohol and drugs, are also at greater risk of depression. If the symptoms of depression in your child have lasted for at least 2 weeks, schedule a visit with their doctor to make sure there are no physical reasons for the symptoms and to make sure that your child gets proper treatment. A consultation with amental healthcare professional who specializes in children is also recommended. Keep in mind that the pediatrician may ask to speak with your child alone. A mental health evaluation should include interviews with you (the parent or primary caregiver) and your child, and any other psychological testing that is needed. Information from teachers, friends, and classmates can be useful for showing that these symptoms are consistent during your child's various activities and are a marked change from previous behavior. There are no specific medical or psychological tests that can clearly show depression, but tools such as questionnaires (for both the child and parents), combined with personal information, can be very useful in helping diagnose depression in children. Sometimes those therapy sessions and questionnaires can uncover other concerns that contribute to depression such asADHD,conduct disorder, and OCD. Some pediatricians start using mental health screens at a child's 11th-year well visit and each year after. The United States Preventive Service Task Force recommends screening for anxiety in children and adolescents ages 8 to 18 years and screening for major depressive disorder (MDD) in adolescents ages 12 to 18 years. Treatment optionsfor children with depression are similar to those for adults, includingpsychotherapy(counseling) and medication. Your child's doctor may suggestpsychotherapyfirst and considerantidepressantmedicine as an option if there is no significant improvement. The best studies to date show that a combination of psychotherapy and medication is most effective attreating depression. But studies do show that theantidepressantfluoxetine (Prozac) is effective in treating depression in children and teens. The drug is officially recognized by the FDA for treatment of children ages 8 to 18 with depression. Most medications used to treat depression in children have a black box warning about the possibility of increasing suicidal thoughts. It is important to start and monitor these medications under the care of a trained professional and talk with them about the potential risks and benefits for your child. Treating children who have bipolar disorder Children with bipolar disorder are usually treated with psychotherapy and a combination of medicines, usually an antidepressant and a mood stabilizer. Antidepressantsneed to be used with caution, as they can trigger bouts of manic or hyperactive behavior in children with bipolar disorder. Managing a child's medication must be part of an overall care plan that includes therapy and routine primary care appointments. The FDA warns that antidepressant medications may increase the risk of suicidal thinking and behavior in children and adolescents with depression and other psychiatric disorders. If you have questions or concerns, discuss them with your doctor. Also, if your child is placed on these medications, it is still very important to continue to follow closely with the doctor and therapist. Studies have found that first-time depression in children is happening at younger ages than previously. As in adults, depression may come back later in life. Depression often appears at the same time as other physical illnesses. And because studies have shown that depression may precede more serious mental illness later in life, diagnosis, early treatment, and close monitoring are crucial. As a parent, it is sometimes easier to deny that your child has depression. You may put off seeking help because of the social stigmas associated with mental illness. It is very important for you -- as the parent -- to understand depression and realize the importance of treatment so that your child may continue to grow physically and emotionally in a healthy way. It is also important to seekeducationabout the future effects depression may have on your child throughout adolescence and adulthood. Parents should be particularly vigilant for signs that may indicate that their child is at risk for suicide. Warning signs of suicidal behavior in children include: If you suspect that your child or teenager is depressed, take the time to listen to their concerns. Even if you don't think the problem is of real concern, remember that it may feel very real to them. It’s important to keep the lines of communication open, even if your child seems to want to withdraw. Try to avoid telling your child what to do. Instead, listen closely and you may discover more about the issues causing the problems. If you feel overwhelmed or unable to reach your child, or if you continue to be concerned, seek professional help. SOURCE: National Institute of Mental Health: "Depression in Children and Adolescents." Differences between feeling depressed and feeling blue. Famous people who've struggled with persistent sadness. Learn the truth about this serious illness. Tips to stay the treatment course. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.