Mostskincancers are detected and cured before they spread. Melanoma that has spread to other organs presents the greatest treatment challenge. Standard treatments for localized basal cell and squamous cellcarcinomasare safe and effective. Small tumors can be surgically excised, removed with a scraping tool (curette) and then cauterized, frozen with liquid nitrogen, or killed with low-doseradiation. Applying an ointment containing a chemotherapeutic agent called 5-fluorouracil-- or an immune response modifier calledimiquimod-- to a superficial tumor for several weeks may also work. Larger localized tumors are removed surgically. In rare cases where basal cell orsquamous cell carcinomahas begun to spread beyond the skin, tumors are removed surgically and patients are treated withchemotherapyand radiation. Sometimes disfiguring or metastatic (spreading) basal cell skin cancers that are not able to be treated by surgery or radiation are treated orally withsonidegib(Odomzo) orvismodegib(Everidge). Melanoma tumors must be removed surgically, preferably before they spread beyond the skin into other organs. The surgeon removes the tumor fully, along with a safe margin of surrounding tissue. There is controversy about whether removing nearby lymph nodes is valuable in certain cases. Neither radiation norchemotherapywill cure advanced melanoma, but either treatment may slow the disease and relieve symptoms.Chemotherapy, sometimes in combination with immunotherapy -- using drugs likeinterferon-alpha and interleukin-2-- is generally preferred. If melanoma spreads to thebrain, radiation is used to slow the growth and control symptoms. Immunotherapy is a relatively new field ofcancer treatmentthat attempts to target and killcancercells by manipulating the body's immune system. Some of the most promising developments in the field of immunotherapy have sprung from efforts to cure advanced melanoma. Some researchers are treating advanced cases withvaccines, T-VEC (Imlygic), a genetically modified herpes virus used to infect and kill cancer cells. and other drugs such as interferon, interleukin-2 checkpoint inhibitors such asipilimumab(Yervoy),nivolumab(Opdivo) orpembrolizumab(Keytruda) in an effort to stimulate immune cells into attacking melanoma cells more aggressively. Genetic manipulation of melanoma tumors may make them more vulnerable to attack by the immune system. Each of these experimental treatment approaches aims to immunize a patient's body against its owncancer-- something the body cannot do naturally. There are also drugs that target specific gene changes within normal cells that cause them to become cancerous. Often called targeted therapy, these drugs includedabrafenib(Tafinlar),trametinib(Mekinist), andvemurafenib(Zelboraf). People who have hadskin canceronce are at risk for getting it again. Anyone who has been treated forskin cancerof any kind should have a checkup at least once a year. About 20% ofskin cancerpatients experience recurrence, usually within the first two years after diagnosis. Once skin cancer is diagnosed, the only acceptable treatment is medical care. Alternative approaches may be useful incancerprevention and in combatingnausea,vomiting,fatigue, and headaches from chemotherapy, radiation, or immunotherapy used to treat advanced skin cancer. Be sure to discuss any alternative treatments you are considering using with your cancer doctor. Skin experts know that the mineral zinc and the antioxidant vitamins A (beta-carotene), C, and E can help repair damaged body tissue and promotehealthy skin. Now, researchers are trying to determine whether these and othernutrientsmight protect skin from the harmful effects of sunlight. To test the theory, selected skin cancer patients are given experimentalsupplementsof these vitamins in the hope of preventing cancer recurrence. Nicotinamide(vitamin B3) 500 mg twice daily helps to reduce the incidence for squamous cell and basal cell skin cancers by 23%. Polypodium Leucotomos (leaf of a fern native to Central and South America) oral supplement has been shown to alter the effects of UV radiation. Curcumin has potential anti-cancer activity and a potential role in the treatment of melanoma. Also, studies suggest that alcohol consumption can increase the risks of skin cancer and melanoma- stay tuned for more definitive studies. SOURCES: News release, FDA.American Cancer Society.National Cancer Institute.American Academy of Dermatologists. What you need to know. For healthy blood cells. Separate fact from fiction. Symptoms, screening tests, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.