Diabetic nephropathy --kidney diseasethat results from diabetes -- is the number one cause of kidney failure. Almost a third of people withdiabetesdevelop diabetic nephropathy. People with diabetes and kidney disease do worse overall than people with kidney disease alone. This is because people with diabetes tend to have other long-standing medical conditions, like high blood pressure, high cholesterol, andbloodvessel disease (atherosclerosis). People with diabetes also are more likely to have otherkidney-related problems, such asbladder infectionsandnerve damageto thebladder. Kidney disease intype 1 diabetesis slightly different than intype 2 diabetes. Intype 1 diabetes,kidneydisease rarely begins in the first 10 years after diagnosis of diabetes. Intype 2 diabetes, some patients already have kidney disease by the time they are diagnosed with diabetes. There are often no symptoms with early diabetic nephropathy. As the kidney function worsens, symptoms may include: As kidney damage progresses, your kidneys cannot remove the waste from your blood. The waste then builds up in your body and can reach poisonous levels, a condition known as uremia. People with uremia are often confused and occasionally become comatose. Certain blood tests that look for specific blood chemistry can be used to diagnose kidney damage. It also can be detected early by finding protein in the urine. Treatments are available that can help slow progression to kidney failure. That's why you should have your urine tested every year if you have diabetes. Loweringblood pressureand maintaining blood sugar control are absolutely necessary to slow the progression of diabetic nephropathy. There are medications available which have been found to slow down the progression of kidney damage. They include: If not treated, the kidneys will continue to fail and larger amounts of proteins can be detected in the urine. Advanced kidney failure requires treatment withdialysisor a kidney transplant.  SOURCES: National Kidney Foundation: “Diabetes and Kidney Disease.” American Diabetes Association: “Kidney Disease (Nephropathy).” The Kidney Foundation: “Diabetes and Kidney Disease.” Gross, J.Diabetes Care2005. See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.