When you havediabetes, you have a lot to manage. Highblood sugarcan lead to other conditions, likeeye problems. One of the most common ones isdiabetic macular edema. It's serious and can rob you of yourvision. That's a scary possibility, but knowing what to look out for and getting the right treatment can help protect your sight. Even if you don't notice problems, when you havediabetesit's important you get youreyeschecked every year. If you do have a problem, see an eye doctor right away. Your eye doctor may refer you to an ophthalmologist who specializes in the retina and can provide treatment. If you catch it early, there's a chance you can stop long-term damage. Highblood sugarweakens thebloodvessels in youreyes. That can make them leak or grow out of control in your retina, the light-sensitive area at the back of youreye. This is calleddiabetic retinopathy. When fluid seeps into your retina, it can cause diabetic macular edema. The leaking makes your retina swell, which hampers the work of your macula, the special, sensitive part that gives you sharpvision. Diabetic macular edema doesn’t always cause symptoms. But you may: If this happens to you, see your doctor right away. Before any testing, your doctor may ask you questions: You will need a thorougheye exam, which usually includes: If your doctor thinks you have diabetic macular edema, you may also need one or both of these tests: To treat diabetic macular edema, doctors may use drugs that are injected into your eyes tohelp stabilize the new blood vessels and stop leaking. They alsoslow the growth of new blood vessels.The drugs they will use are Anti-VEGF medications. VEGF and Ang-2 are proteins that can lead to vision loss in people with DME. They cause the growth of abnormal and fragile blood vessels. Most treatments target and block only VEGF. The main drugs include: Angiopoietin-2 is another protein involved in blood vessel formation. Ang-2 inhibitors help stabilize these fragile new blood vessels so they don't leak. VEGF/Ang-2 inhibitors include: In severe cases, you may also havelaser photocoagulation. A doctor will use a tiny laser on your eye to seal leaking blood vessels. You may need more than one treatment to control the problem. It's usually not painful, but you may have a slight stinging feeling when the laser touches you. Sometimessteroidinjections may help. Another treatment is a surgery calledvitrectomy. This is usually done because of bleeding (not macular edema), and doctors take out the fluid that is clouding your vision and replace it with a clear solution. There’s a lot you can do to prevent your condition from getting worse. First, manage your diabetes by controlling your blood sugar,blood pressure, andcholesterol. Diet changes, keeping ahealthy weight, andexercisecan all help you manage these problems. Talk with your doctor about the best way to do this. Also, don’t sidestep regulareye exams. Symptoms can sneak up. Your doctor needs to see you to keep track of how your treatment is working. Have you already lost some vision? Talk to your doctor about visual aids, like magnifying glasses, ifeyeglassesalone aren't enough. Ask them about resources in your area that can help you learn skills for living withvision loss. Treatment can help you protect your vision. It can greatly decrease your chance of losing your vision. Stay on top of your diabetes, and stick with your treatment plan. You'll have the best chance of maintaining your sight and staying independent. For more information about the eye conditions related to diabetes, go to the web site of theAmerican Diabetes Association. They have links that can help you get the support you need. SOURCES: American Academy of Ophthalmology: “Diabetic Macular Edema,” “What Is Macular Edema?” Enrichment Audio Resource Services: “Our Mission.” News release, FDA. National Eye Institute: “Facts About Diabetic Retinopathy.” National Institutes of Health: “Study Confirms New Treatment for Diabetic Macular Edema.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.