Diabetescan harm your nerves. That damage, calledneuropathy, may be painful. It can happen in several ways, and they all seem to be related to blood sugar levels being too high for too long. To prevent it, work with your doctor to manage your blood sugar. You may hear your doctor mention the four types of diabetes-related neuropathy: peripheral, autonomic, proximal, and focal. This type usually affects the feet and legs. Rare cases affect the arms, abdomen, and back. Symptoms include: Early symptoms usually get better when your blood sugar is under control. There aremedicationsto help manage the discomfort. What you should do: This type usually affects the digestive system, especially the stomach. It can also affect the blood vessels, urinary system, and sex organs. In yourdigestive system: Symptoms include: What you should do:You may need to eat smaller meals and take medication to treat it. In blood vessels: Symptoms include: If you have it:Avoid standing up too quickly. You may also need to wear special stockings (ask your doctor about them) and take medicine. In Men: Symptoms include:They may not be able to have or keep an erection, or they may have “dry” or reduced ejaculations. What you should do:See your doctor, because there are other possible causes than diabetes. Treatment includes: In Women: Symptoms include:Can include less vaginal lubrication and fewer or no orgasms. What you should do:See your doctor. Treatments include: In the Urinary System: Symptoms include: What you should do:Tell your doctor. Treatments may include: This type causes pain (usually on one side) in the thighs, hips, or buttocks. It can also lead to weakness in the legs. Most people with this condition need treatment, such as medication and physical therapy, for their weakness or pain. This type can appear suddenly and affect specific nerves, most often in the head, torso, or leg. It causes muscle weakness or pain. Symptoms include: What you should do:Tell your doctor about your symptoms. Focal neuropathy is painful and unpredictable. But it tends to improve by itself over weeks or months. It usually doesn’t cause long-term damage. People with diabetes can also get other nerve-related conditions, such as nerve compressions (entrapment syndromes). Carpal tunnel syndromeis a very common type of entrapment syndrome. It causes numbness and tingling of in the hand and sometimes muscle weakness or pain. If you think you may have any type of nerve problem, talk with your doctor, so they can check for the cause. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association (ADA): “Diabetic Neuropathy (Nerve Damage) and Diabetes.” ADA: “Additional Specific Types of Diabetic Neuropathy.” National Diabetes Education Program: “Prevention and Early Intervention for Diabetes Foot Problems.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.