Diabetic retinopathyis aneyecondition that causes changes to thebloodvessels in the part of youreyecalled the retina. That's the lining at the back of your eye that changes light into images. The blood vessels can swell, leak fluid, or bleed, which often leads tovisionchanges or blindness. It usually affects botheyes. When left untreated,diabetic retinopathycan scar and damage your retina. Diabetic retinopathy is the most common cause ofvision lossfor people withdiabetes. It’s the leading cause of blindness for all adults in the U.S. You might not have any signs of diabetic retinopathy until it becomes serious. When you do have symptoms, you might notice: If your blood glucose level (blood sugar) is too high for too long, it blocks off the small blood vessels that keep your retina healthy. Youreyewill try to grow new blood vessels, but they won’t develop well. The blood vessels start to weaken. They can leak blood and fluid into your retina. This can cause another condition called macular edema. It can make your vision blurry. As your condition gets worse, more blood vessels become blocked. Scar tissue builds up because of the new blood vessels your eye has grown. This extra pressure can cause your retina to tear or detach. This can also lead to eye conditions likeglaucomaorcataracts(the clouding of your eye’s lens) that may result in blindness. If you have any form of diabetes -- type 1, type 2, or gestational -- you may get diabetic retinopathy. Your chance goes up the longer you have diabetes. Almost half of Americans diagnosed with diabetes have some stage of diabetic retinopathy. And only about half of them know they have this disease. Other things that can raise your odds of diabetic retinopathy include: Diabetic retinopathy tends to go through these four stages: Youreye doctorcan usually tell if you have diabetic retinopathy during youreye exam. Treatments for diabetic retinopathy include: Anti-VEGF injection therapy.Drugsthat block vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a protein that makes abnormal blood vessels grow in your eye, can reverse the blood vessel growths and lower fluid buildup in your retina. Anti-VEGF drugs includeaflibercept(Eylea),bevacizumab(Avastin), andranibizumab(Lucentis). Focal/grid macular laser surgery.Lasers make tinyburnson the leaky areas of vessels in your macula. You may need anti-VEGF therapy after this surgery. Corticosteroids.Doctors can implant or inject these medications into your eye. There are both short-term and long-acting types.Steroidscan raise your chance ofglaucomaorcataracts. Your eye doctor will monitor the pressure in your eye if you take them. Scatter laser surgery.This treatment makes up to 2,000 tiny burns to treat spots where your retina has detached from the macula. This can shrink abnormal blood vessels. You may need two or more sessions. Laser surgery can save your central vision, but it may lessen your side, color, or nighttime vision. It works best if you get it before those new vessels start to bleed. Vitrectomy.If blood vessels leak into your retina and vitreous humor and your vision clouds, you may need to have this procedure. It removes the leaked blood so you can see better. This can treat cloudy vision. Your doctor will tell you if any of these treatments are right for you. They’ll do them in the doctor's office or in the hospital. Diabetic macular edema (DME) is a serious complication of diabetic retinopathy. A healthy macula gives you sharp vision straight in front of you. This is what you need to drive, read, and see other people’s faces. If your diabetic retinopathy causes fluid buildup and swelling in your macula, you can get DME. DME is the most common reason people with diabetic retinopathy lose their vision, and about half of people with diabetic retinopathy get DME. You’re more likely to get DME at later stages of diabetic retinopathy, but it can happen at any point. Sometimes, vision loss from DME can’t be reversed. Work with your doctor to keep your blood sugar andblood pressureat good levels. This will slow down diabetic retinopathy and maybe even stop it from happening. Here are more tips to prevent diabetic retinopathy: SOURCES: National Eye Institute: “Facts About Diabetic Eye Disease,” “How is macular edema treated?” Cleveland Clinic: “Diabetic Retinopathy.” American Academy of Ophthalmology: “Diabetic Retinopathy?” National Eye Institute: Mayo Clinic: “Diabetic retinopathy.” CDC: “Common Eye Disorders.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.