Women have been using the diaphragm for birth control in one form or another for hundreds of years. It’s a small, flexible cup made of silicone or latex that goes inside thevaginato blockspermfrom reaching an egg. It has very few risks and can be up to 94% effective. Here’s how to decide if it’s right for you. You need to use a diaphragm along with a cream or gel that kills sperm, called a spermicide. First squeeze about a tablespoon of spermicide inside the cup of the diaphragm and spread more around the rim. To put it in: You can put it in up to 6 hours before you have sex, and you need to leave it in for at least 6 hours after. Once it’s in place, you can havesexmore than once, but you need to reapply spermicide before each time. Do that with your fingers or an applicator, making sure to get it deep inside your vagina. Most spermicides only work if you use them less than an hour before you have sex. So if you put the diaphragm in hours ahead of time, remember to add more. You can leave the diaphragm in for up to 24 hours. To remove it: How well a diaphragm prevents pregnancy depends a lot on whether you use it correctly. Six out of 100 women willget pregnantwith the diaphragm if they use it perfectly every time. Most people make mistakes sometimes, so the typical rate is more like 12 to 18 out of 100. That’s more effective thancondomsor other barrier methods, but less effective than sterilization, intrauterine devices (IUDs), orbirth control pills. There are some risks that come with a diaphragm. The most serious one istoxic shock syndrome, a condition you get from abacterial infection. You can avoid it by not leaving a diaphragm in for more than 24 hours. The device also can cause irritation or a reaction if you’re allergic to latex. And some women geturinary tract infectionsmore often when they use a diaphragm. You need a prescription to get one, so see your doctor or other health care professional.  A traditional diaphragm requires fitting; the Caya, a newer type, is a one-size-fits-most (but is less reliable for preventing pregnancy). The diaphragm isn't for everyone: you can’t use it if you have poor pelvic muscle tone or problems with the shape of your vagina. You’ll have to replace it at least every 2 years or more often if your diaphragm gets damaged. You may need a different size if youget pregnant, have pelvic surgery, or gain or lose more than 15 pounds. The diaphragm may be a good choice forbirth controlif you want to avoid hormones and if you want something that you can easily reverse if you want to get pregnant. But you have to be able to use and take care of it properly and be at low risk forSTDs. SOURCES: Allen, R.American Family Physician, January 2004. FDA: “Birth Control: Medicines to Help You.” American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Barrier Methods of Birth Control: Diaphragm, Sponge, Cervical Cap and Condom.” Planned Parenthood: “Diaphragm.” FDA: “Birth Control Guide.” National Institutes of Health: “What Are the Different Types of Contraception?” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Birth Control: How to Use Your Diaphragm.” Planned Parenthood: “Spermicide.” Association of Reproductive Health Professionals: “Diaphragm.” caya.eu. Take this quiz. Here's what to expect. Here's what to do next. What you should know to prevent pregnancy. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.