A broken toe is when you break abonein one of your toes. Each of your toes has three bones, except for the big toe, which has two. A break can happen when you stub your toe really hard or drop something on it. A broken toe doesn’t usually need much medical care. In fact, it can be tough to tell whether you broke it or just hurt it badly, and the treatment’s often the same. When you break a toe, you’ll likely have:  If you think you broke your toe, it’s best to have your doctor look at it. Even though you can often treat it yourself, a broken toe can sometimes lead to more serious problems, like infection,arthritis, or long-termfoot pain. Call your doctor if you have one these more serious breaks, which do need treatment: For a less serious break, even if you put it off at first, call your doctor if you have:  First, your doctor will ask you what happened and what symptoms you’re having. They’ll check for tenderness and broken skin around your toe. They’ll also test your nerves and blood flow. Then, if your doctor thinks it’s a break, you’ll likely get an X-ray. Treatment depends on where and how bad the break is. In most cases, you’ll be sent home with directions for self-care. You may also get a prescription for pain medicine. It helps you heal if you can keep your toe from bending too much. Your doctor might suggest buddy taping. That’s where you tape your broken toe to the toe next to it. First, you first put cotton or gauze between your toes so the skin doesn’t rub and get raw. Then, you wrap them with medical tape. You doctor may also give you a stiff-bottomed shoe with a cloth top. This keeps your toe from bending too much and allows room for swelling. If you broke your toe all the way through and the bone moved, your doctor may need to set it back in place. First, you’ll get a shot to numb your toe. Then your doctor moves the bones back together with their hands. There’s no surgery involved. You may get a cast if the bone pieces don’t stay in place. If you have a wound, you may also getantibioticsand atetanus shot. If you have blood trapped under your toenail, your doctor will try to drain it but may have to remove the nail completely. For very serious breaks, you may need surgery to put in pins or screws that hold the bones in place. For the first few days or weeks after you break your toe, you can:  Most of the time, your toe will heal in about 4-6 weeks. But it could take as long as 8 weeks for more serious breaks. You’ll need to hold off on sports and other physical activities until your doctor gives you the green light. If you start those too soon, you might re-injure your toe. As you heal, it’s also best to avoid high heels or any shoes that squeeze your toes. When you can wear shoes and walk without pain, you can ease back into your normal activities. You can expect some stiffness or soreness when you first get going again, but that will fade as you get back to normal. SOURCES: National Health Service (U.K.): “Broken Toe.” Mayo Clinic: “Broken Toe.” Mount Sinai: “Broken Toe -- Self-Care.” American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society: “Toe and Forefoot Fractures.” American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons: “Toe and Metatarsal Fractures (Broken Toes).” University of North Carolina Wilmington: “Instruction Sheet -- Broken Toe.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.