If you have chronickidney disease(CKD), it’s important to watch what you eat and drink. That’s because yourkidneyscan’t remove waste products and fluid from your body the way they should. A kidney-friendlydietcan help you stay healthier longer. A major function of the kidneys is to get rid of waste and extra fluid from your body through your pee. They also: A kidney-friendly diet is a way of eating that helps protect your kidneys from further damage. You’ll have to limit some foods and fluids so other fluids and minerals likeelectrolytesdon’t build up in your body. At the same time, you’ll have to make sure you get the right balance of protein, calories,vitamins, and minerals. If you’re in the early stages of CKD, there may be few, if any, limits on what you can eat. But as your disease gets worse, you’ll have to be more careful about what you put into your body. The doctor may suggest you work with a dietitian to choose foods that are easy on your kidneys. They might recommend: This mineral is found naturally in many foods. It’s most common in table salt. Sodium affects yourblood pressure. It also helps to maintain thewaterbalance in your body. Healthy kidneys keep sodium levels in check. But if you have CKD, extra sodium and fluids build up in your body. This can cause a number of problems, likeswollen ankles,high blood pressure, shortness of breath, and fluid buildup around yourheartandlungs. You should aim for less than 2 grams of sodium in your daily diet. Take these simple steps to cut the sodium in your diet: You need these minerals to keep your bones healthy and strong. When your kidneys are healthy, they remove thephosphorusyou don’t need. But if you have CKD, your phosphorus levels can get too high. This puts you at risk forheart disease. What’s more, yourcalciumlevels begin to drop. To make up for it, your body pulls it from your bones. This can make them weak and easier to break. If you have late-stage CKD, your doctor may advise you to get no more than 1,000 milligrams (mg) of phosphorus mineral each day. You can do this by: Foods that are high in calcium also tend to be high in phosphorus. The doctor might suggest you cut back on calcium-rich foods. Dairy foods that are lower in phosphorus include: The doctor might also tell you to stop taking over-the-countercalcium supplementsand suggest a phosphorus binder, a medicine that controls your phosphorus levels. This mineral helps your nerves and muscles work properly. But when you have CKD, your body can’t filter out extra potassium. When you have too much of it in yourblood, it can lead to seriousheartproblems. Potassium is found in a lot of fruits and veggies, like bananas, potatoes,avocados,oranges, cookedbroccoli, rawcarrots,greens(exceptkale),tomatoes, and melons. These foods can affect potassium levels in your blood. Your doctor will let you know if you need to limit this mineral in your diet. If so, they may recommend you try low-potassium foods, like: As your CKD gets worse, you may need to make other changes to your diet. This might involve cutting back on foods that are high inprotein, especially animal protein. These include meats, seafood, and dairy products. You may also need extra iron. Talk to your doctor about which iron-rich foods you can eat when you have CKD. DASH stands for Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension. It’s a diet rich in fruits, veggies, low-fat dairy products,whole grains, fish, poultry, beans, seeds, and nuts. It’s low in sodium, sugars and sweets, fats, and red meats. Talk to your doctor about it if you have CKD. They’ll let you know if there are certain reasons you shouldn’t trythe DASH diet. It isn’t an option if you’re ondialysis. If you have early-stage CKD, you probably don’t need to cut back on fluids. But if your condition gets worse, your doctor will let you know if you need to limit those, too. To cut back on fluids you can: SOURCES: American Kidney Fund: “Kidney-friendly Diet for CKD,” “Nutrition and Chronic Kidney Disease,” “Nutrition and Early Kidney Disease,” “The DASH Diet.” National Kidney Disease Education Program: “Eating Right for Kidney Health -- Tips for People With Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD).” National Kidney Foundation: “How Your Kidneys Work,” “Potassium and Your CKD Diet,” “Anemia and Iron Needs in Dialysis,” “Fluid Overload in a Dialysis Patient.” Blood Purification: “Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders in Chronic Kidney Disease and End-Stage Kidney Failure.” Mayo Clinic: “Low-phosphorus diet: Helpful for kidney disease?” Cleveland Clinic: “Hyperphosphatemia in Kidney Disease: How to Choose a Phosphorus Binder.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.