Nausea is an uneasiness of thestomachthat often comes beforevomiting.Vomitingis the forcible voluntary or involuntary emptying ("throwing up") of stomach contents through themouth. Nausea and vomiting are not diseases, but they are symptoms of many conditions such as: The causes of vomiting differ according to age. For children, it is common for vomiting to occur from aviral infection,food poisoning,milk allergy, motion sickness, overeating or feeding,coughing, or blockedintestinesand illnesses in which the child has ahigh fever. The timing of the nausea or vomiting can indicate the cause. When appearing shortly after a meal, nausea or vomiting may be caused by food poisoning,gastritis(inflammation of the stomach lining), anulcer, orbulimia. Nausea or vomiting one to eight hours after a meal may also indicatefood poisoning. However, certain food- borne bacteria, such as salmonella, can take longer to produce symptoms. Usually, vomiting is harmless, but it can be a sign of a more serious illness. Some examples of serious conditions that may result in nausea or vomiting includeconcussions,meningitis(infection of the membrane linings of thebrain), intestinal blockage,appendicitis, and brain tumors. Another concern isdehydration. Adults have a lower risk of becoming dehydrated, because they can usually detect the symptoms ofdehydration(such as increased thirst and dry lips or mouth). But young children have a greater risk of becoming dehydrated, especially if they also havediarrhea, because they often are unable to communicate symptoms of dehydration. Adults caring for sick children need to be aware of these visiblesigns of dehydration: dry lips and mouth, sunkeneyes, and rapid breathing or pulse. In infants, also watch for decreased urination and a sunken fontanelle (soft spot on top of the baby's head). Recurrent vomiting in pregnancy can lead to a serious condition calledhyperemesis gravidarumin which the mother may develop fluid and mineral imbalances that can endanger their life or that of their unborn child. Rarely, excessive vomiting can tear the lining of theesophagus, also known as a Mallory-Weiss tear. If the esophagus is ruptured, this is called Boerhaave's syndrome, and is a medical emergency. Call a doctor about nausea and vomiting: You should seek immediate medical care if any of the following situations occur with vomiting: Treatment for vomiting (regardless of age or cause) includes: There are several ways to try and prevent nausea from developing: When you begin to feel nauseated, you may be able to prevent vomiting by: To prevent nausea and vomiting in children: SOURCES:National Institutes of Health.American Academy of Family Physicians. KidsHealth.org (Nemours Foundation). Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.