Appendicitis is aninflammationof theappendix. It's a medical emergency that almost always requires surgery as soon as possible to remove the appendix. Luckily, you can live just fine without it.   This 3 1/2-inch-long tube of tissue extends from your large intestine on the lower right side of your body. The appendix has specialized tissue that can make antibodies, but no one is completely sure what its function is. In the U.S., 1 in 20 people will get appendicitis at some point in their lives. Although it can strike at any age, appendicitis is rare in children younger than 2. It’s most likely to affect people between the ages of 10 and 30. Appendicitis happens when the appendix gets blocked, often by poop, a foreign body (something inside you that isn’t supposed to be there), orcancer. Blockage may also result from infection, since the appendix can swell in response to any infection in the body. The classic symptoms of appendicitis include: Other less common symptoms of appendicitis include: If you have any of these symptoms, see a doctor right away. Timely diagnosis and treatment are important. Don’t eat, drink, or use any pain remedies, antacids, laxatives, or heating pads. Diagnosing appendicitis can be tricky. Symptoms are often unclear or similar to those of other illnesses, includinggallbladder problems, bladder orurinary tract infection,Crohn's disease,gastritis,kidney stones, intestinal infection, and ovary problems. These tests can help diagnose appendicitis: Appendicitis is almost always treated as an emergency. Surgery to remove the appendix, which is called an appendectomy, is the standard treatment for almost all cases of appendicitis. Generally, if your doctor suspects that you have appendicitis, they will quickly remove it to avoid a rupture. If you have anabscess, you may get two procedures: one to drain the abscess of pus and fluid, and a later one to take out the appendix. But some research shows that treating acute appendicitis with antibiotics may help you avoid surgery. Before your appendix is taken out, you’ll takeantibioticsto fight infection. You’ll usually getgeneral anesthesia, meaning you’ll be asleep for the procedure. The doctor removes your appendix through a 4-inch-long cut or with a device called a laparoscope (a thin telescope-like tool that lets them see inside your belly). This procedure is called laparoscopy. If you haveperitonitis, the surgeon will also clean out your belly and drain the pus. You can get up and move around within 12 hours after surgery. You should be able to go back to your normal routine in 2 to 3 weeks. If you had a laparoscopy, recovery is faster. After an appendectomy, call your doctor if you have: Left untreated, an inflamed appendix will burst, spilling bacteria and debris into the abdominal cavity, the central part of your body that holds your liver, stomach, and intestines. This can lead to peritonitis, a serious inflammation of the abdominal cavity's lining (the peritoneum). It can be deadly unless it is treated quickly with strong antibiotics and surgery to remove the pus. Sometimes, an abscess forms outside an inflamed appendix. Scar tissue then "walls off" the appendix from the rest of your organs. This keeps the infection from spreading. But an abscessed appendix can tear and lead to peritonitis. There’s no way to prevent appendicitis. But it may be less common in people who eat foods high in fiber, such as freshfruits and vegetables. SOURCES: Di Saverio, S.Ann Surg., July 2014. National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Emedicine. University of Maryland Medical Center: "Appendicitis." UpToDate: "Management of acute appendicitis in adults." Mayo Clinic: “Appendicitis.” Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons: “Laparoscopic Appendix Removal (Appendectomy).” American Academy of Family Physicians. The Mayo Clinic. American College of Surgeons. National Institutes of Health. Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.