IBSis a mix of belly discomfort orpainand trouble with bowel habits: either going more or less often than normal (diarrheaorconstipation) or having a different kind of stool (thin, hard, or soft and liquid). Doctors used to call IBS other names including: There are four types of the condition: IBS isn’t life-threatening, and it doesn't make you more likely to get othercolonconditions, such asulcerative colitis,Crohn's disease, orcolon cancer. But it can be a long-lasting problem that changes how you live your life. People with IBS may miss work or school more often, and they may feel less able to take part in daily activities. Some people may need to change their work setting: shifting to working at home, changing hours, or even not working at all. People with IBS have symptoms that can include: Other things may cause these symptoms sometimes. If it’s IBS, you’ll likely have these symptoms weekly for 3 months, or less often for at least 6 months. Women with IBS may have more symptoms during their period. Some people also have urinary symptoms or sexual problems.Stresscan make symptoms worse. When to call your doctor If you have an IBS symptom that lasts a long time, you get a new symptom, or your pain is worse than usual or you have new pain, see your doctor. If you usually take over-the-counter medications but now they don’t ease problems like diarrhea, gas, or cramping, you also need to see a doctor. Even if you don’t think a problem is physically part of IBS, but it bothers you, tell your doctor. For example, if you’re stressed out or anxious about it, or if you’re losing sleep over the problem, let your doctor know. IBS usually doesn’t lead to more serious diseases, but there are “red flags” to look for that could mean something more serious is going on. A red-flag symptom is one that isn’t usually seen with IBS. If you have one or more, see your doctor. You’ll need tests to find out what’s going on. Red-flag symptoms include: While several things are known to triggerIBS symptoms, experts don't know what causes the condition. Studies suggest that the colon gets hypersensitive, overreacting to mild stimulation. Instead of slow, rhythmic muscle movements, the bowel muscles spasm. That can cause diarrhea or constipation. Another theory suggests it may involve chemicals made by the body, such as serotonin and gastrin, that control nerve signals between thebrainand digestive tract. Other researchers are studying to see if certain bacteria in the bowels can lead to the condition. IBS affects between 25 million and 45 million Americans. Some things seem to make people more likely to have it than others: There are no specific lab tests that can diagnose IBS. Your doctor will see if your symptoms match with the definition of IBS, and they may run tests to rule out conditions such as: Your doctor may do some of the following tests to decide if you have IBS: Nearly all people with IBS can get help, but no single treatment works for everyone. You and your doctor will need to work together to find the right treatment plan to manage your symptoms. Many things can triggerIBS symptoms, including certain foods, medicines, the presence ofgasor stool, and emotionalstress. You’ll need to learn what your triggers are. You may need to make some lifestyle changes and take medication. Dietand lifestyle changes Usually, with a few basic changes in diet and activities, IBS will improve over time. Here are some tips to help ease symptoms: Common food "triggers" are redpeppers, green onions, red wine, wheat, and cow's milk. If you're concerned about getting enough calcium, you can try to get it from other foods, likebroccoli, spinach, turnipgreens, tofu, yogurt, sardines,salmonwith bones,calcium-fortified orange juice and breads, orcalcium supplements. Your doctor may suggest you try something called a low FODMAP diet that cuts down on hard-to-digest carbs such as wheat, beans, and certain fruits and vegetables. Medications The following types of drugs are used to treat IBS: Other treatments can help with symptoms of IBS: Belly pain and bloating Constipation Diarrhea Make sure to follow your doctor's instructions when taking IBS medications, includinglaxatives, which can be habit-forming if you don’t use them carefully. 10 questions to ask your doctor Going to the doctor can be intimidating. You might feel rushed and forget to ask questions that are important. It's always a good idea to know what to ask beforehand and to take notes while with the doctor. Some of the questions below may be worth asking. Print out these questions and take them with you to your next appointment: 1. Could some other condition be causing myIBS symptoms? Could I have inflammatory bowel disease or colon cancer? 2. Should I keep a diary of myIBS symptoms, and, if so, what should I write down? 3. Should I takelaxativesor other over-the-countermedications? If so, what type, and how often is it safe to take them? 4. Would it help my IBS symptoms to add more fiber to my diet? If so, how much and what kind? 5. Are there other dietary changes you would recommend forIBS, and should I consult a dietitian? 6. Could relaxation therapy, counseling, or exercise help myIBS? 7. Should I take prescription medications for my IBS symptoms? If so, what side effects should I expect? 8. Are there any tests you would recommend now or in the future? 9. Are there any other approaches or treatments I should know about? 10. How soon should I have a follow-up appointment? Because finding an IBS treatment that works can take time, other health problems can crop up in the meantime. None of the complications are life-threatening, though. IBS doesn't lead tocanceror other more serious bowel-related conditions. Here are some of the health issues it can cause: SOURCES: National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. Irritable Bowel Syndrome Association. FDA. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS),” “Eating, Diet and Nutrition for Irritable Bowel Syndrome,” "Diagnosis of Irritable Bowel Syndrome," "Treatment for Irritable Bowel Syndrome." theibsnetwork.org: “Is it food intolerance?” Nature: "Local immune response to food antigens drives meal-induced abdominal pain." About IBS/International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: "Living with IBS," "IBS Patients: Their Illness Experience and Unmet Needs," "Facts about IBS." Reporter's Guide to Irritable Bowel Syndrome, Second Edition: "Pregnancy and Irritable Bowel Syndrome." NHS Choices: "Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)." Nursing Times: "Irritable Bowel Syndrome." Harvard Health Publications: "Constipation and Impaction," "Understanding and treating an irritable bowel." Mayo Clinic: "Irritable Bowel Syndrome," "Hemorrhoids," Overactive bladder." Cleveland Clinic: "Gastrointestinal Disorders," "Irritable Bowel Syndrome." Primary Health Care Research and Development:"Long-term impact of irritable bowel syndrome: a qualitative study." World Journal of Gastroenterology:"Irritable bowel syndrome: Pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and evidence-based medicine." Nutrition Journal:"Diet in irritable bowel syndrome." BMC Gastroenterology:"The relationship between irritable bowel syndrome, functional dyspepsia, chronic fatigue and overactive bladder syndrome: a controlled study 6 years after acute gastrointestinal infection." Rehydration Project: "Why is Dehydration So Dangerous?" UnitedHealthCare: "When to see a doctor for an upset stomach." The IBS Network: “When Should I See My Doctor?” Colitis & Crohn’s Foundation of America: “IBS and IBD: Two Very Different Disorders.” FamilyDoctor.org: “Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS).” American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons: “Irritable Bowel Syndrome Expanded Version.” International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: “Changes You Should Not Ignore If You Have IBS,” "Diagnosis of IBS," "Foods That May Cause Gas," "Stress and IBS." UpToDate: “Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome in adults.” Jeffrey Roberts, president and founder, IBS Self Help and Support Group. American College of Gastroenterology. Henderson, P. and DiPalma, J. Southern Medical Journal, March 2011. Pimentel, M.PLoS ONE, May 2015. News release, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. IBSChek.com. Rana, S. and Malik, A.World Journal of Gastroenterology, June 2014. NHS (U.K.): "Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)." Arun Swaminath, MD, director of the inflammatory bowel disease program at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York City. Medscape: “Irritable Bowel Symptoms.” "Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment of Irritable Bowel Syndrome," "Consensus Report: Clinical Trial Guidelines for Pharmacological Treatment of Irritable Bowel Syndrome," "Irritable bowel-type symptoms in HMO examinees." Beth Schorr-Lesnick, MD, FACG, gastroenterologist, Montefiore Medical Center, New York. Leslie Bonci, MPH, RD, author,American Dietetic Association Guide to Better Digestion. National Center for Biotechnology Information. Somerset Medical Center. Thabane, M.World J Gastroenterol.,Aug. 7, 2009. Alimentary Pharmacology & Therapeutics, January 2008. PubMed Central: "Diagnosing Irritable Bowel Syndrome: What's Too Much, What's Enough?" University of Michigan Health System: "Elimination Diet." Prevention strategies to try. From symptoms to treatments. Causes, symptoms, and treatments. Are they related? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.