When you havediarrhea, your bowel movements (or stools) are loose and watery. It’s common and usually not serious. Many people get diarrhea a few times a year. It normally lasts 2 to 3 days. Some people get it more often. That could be because they have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) or other conditions. Usually, diarrhea happens because of a virus that gets into your gut. Some people call it "intestinal flu" or "stomach flu." Other causes include: Diarrhea may also follow constipation, especially for people who have irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). You may have: Most cases of diarrhea are nothing more than a brief inconvenience. But sometimes, they warn of a serious condition. Talk with your doctor if your child has diarrhea for more than 24 hours. If you have it for more than 3 days, make an appointment. Also, be sure to let your doctor know about your diarrhea if you have cancer, or have had recent treatment for it. More serious symptoms of diarrhea include: If you have watery stools more than three times a day and you're not drinking enough fluids, you could become dehydrated. That can be a serious problem if it's not treated. Call your doctor right away if you have: These can be warning signs of things like: Also, call your doctor right away if you have diarrhea and any of these signs of dehydration: Your doctor will ask about your medical history and what medications you take, as well as what you’ve eaten or had to drink recently. They will give you a physical exam to look for signs of dehydration or belly pain. Certain tests can help pinpoint the cause of your diarrhea, including: If your case is mild, you may not need to take anything. Adults can take an over-the-counter medicine such as bismuth subsalicylate or loperamide, which you can get as liquids or tablets. You also need to stay hydrated. You should drink at least six 8-ounce glasses of fluids each day. Choose electrolyte replacement drinks or soda without caffeine. Chicken broth (without the fat), tea with honey, and sports drinks are also good choices. Instead of drinking liquids with your meals, drink liquids between meals. Sip small amounts of fluids often. Liquid probiotics may also help. Your rectal area may become sore because of all the bowel movements that diarrhea brings. You may have itching, burning, or pain when you go to the bathroom. For relief, take a warm bath or sitz bath. Afterward, pat the area dry (don’t rub) with a clean, soft towel. You may also try using ahemorrhoidcream or petroleum jelly on the affected area. If this continues for several days, you should contact your doctor. If you still have diarrhea after 4 weeks, then you have chronic diarrhea. To figure out the cause, your doctor will want to know your symptoms and medical history. You'll get the most out of your appointment if you can tell them: SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians. Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology: “Runners' Diarrhea. Different Patterns and Associated Factors.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Diarrhea.” Mayo Clinic: “Diarrhea.” National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse: “Digestive Diseases: Diarrhea.” The American College of Gastroenterology: “Diarrheal Diseases.” CDC: “Foodborne Illness.” UPMC Health A to Z: "Diarrhea." Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.