Gastroparesisis a condition in which food stays in yourstomachfor longer than it should. You might hear your doctor call it delayed gastric emptying. You may have:  For most people, doctors can’t determine what brought on gastroparesis. It tends to affect women more than men. Diabetesis the most common known cause of gastroparesis. It can damage nerves -- including the vagus nerve, which regulates yourdigestive system-- and certain cells in yourstomach. Other causes of gastroparesis include:  Problems might happen:  Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll also do aphysical exam. They may order tests including:  Depending on the cause, gastroparesis can be chronic, which means it lasts a long time. You can take steps to manage and control it. Changes to diet for gastroparesis Changing your eating habits is one of the best ways to control gastroparesis symptoms. You might try eating six small meals each day rather than three larger ones. This way, you have less food in your stomach and don’t feel as full. Have more liquids and low-residue foods, such as applesauce instead of wholeapples. Drink plenty ofwaterand fluids like low-fatbroths, soups, juices, and sports drinks. Avoid high-fat foods, which can slow digestion, and high-fiber foods, which are harder to digest. Make sure you’re getting enough of the rightnutrition. Your doctor might send you to a dietitian who can help you find foods you like that are easy to digest. Don’t lie down for 2 hours after you eat. Gravity can help your digestion and keep food or acid from traveling into your throat. Gentleexerciselike walking can help you feel better. Medications for gastroparesis Your doctor might give you medicines including: Other treatments for gastroparesis If you have diabetes, controlling your blood sugar levels will keep you from having serious problems. Your doctor might need to give you afeeding tubeor jejunostomy tube. They put it in through your belly and into your small intestine. To feed yourself, you’ll put nutrients into the tube, and they’ll go directly into your small intestine. This way, they skip your stomach and get into your bloodstream faster. Your doctor can also injectbotulinum toxin(such as Botox) into your pylorus, the valve from your stomach to your small intestine. This relaxes the valve, keeping it open for longer so your stomach can empty. Electrical stimulation uses electrodes attached to your stomach wall to trigger stomach contractions. In a procedure called per-oral pyloromyotomy (POP), your doctor uses an endoscope to cut your pylorus valve so it’s easier for your stomach to empty. Although surgery can sometimes cause gastroparesis, patients who haveobesityand diabetes might havegastric bypass surgery. Your doctor creates a small pouch from the top part of your stomach and attaches it to the lower end of your small intestine. This limits how much food you can eat. If your case is severe, you might also need intravenous nutrition or parenteral nutrition, in which nutrients go straight into your bloodstream through a catheter in a vein in your chest. Doctors tend to use this for only a short time. SOURCES: American College of Gastroenterology. National Institutes of Health. Hasler WL.Gastroenterol Clin North Am- 01-SEP-2007. Sutton, K.Gastroenterology, Dec. 14, 2015. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Gastroparesis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Gastroparesis.” Mayo Clinic: “Gastroparesis.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.