Millions of Americans can’t digest a certain sugar in milk and milk products called lactose. If you’re one of them, you havelactose intolerance. The condition isn’t harmful, but it can be uncomfortable and may be embarrassing. There’s no cure, but you can manage it by watching how much milk or milk products you drink or eat. Beinglactose intolerantis not the same as being allergic to milk. Lactose is the sugar that’s in milk. Our bodies use an enzyme calledlactaseto break down that sugar so we can absorb it into our bodies. But people withlactose intolerancedon’t have enough lactase. It’s produced in the small intestine. Even with low levels of lactase, some people can digest milk products just fine. For people who are lactose intolerant, their low lactase levels gives them symptoms after they eat dairy. When we drink milk or have a milk-based product, lactase in our smallintestinesbreaks down the milk sugar. It then gets absorbed into the body through the smallintestines. But people who are lactose intolerant don’t have it so easy. In them, the lactose doesn’t get broken down. Instead, it goes on to thecolon, where it mixes with normal bacteria and ferments. It can cause things like gas,bloatinganddiarrhea. The symptoms are no fun, but they’re not dangerous. Most people can manage their symptoms by changing their diet and limiting the amount of lactose they consume. Some people do better by cutting lactose out of their diet altogether. Your body may be able to handle some lactose without symptoms. Experiment to find out the types and amounts of products with lactose you can eat and drink. There are some steps you can take to test yourself: Believe it or not, most adults around the world can’t digest milk -- 40% of humans stop producing enough lactase to digest milk between the ages of 2 and 5. In the United States, it’s estimated that just over one-third of people are lactose intolerant. It is most common among: It can also be inherited or associated with other specific diseases. Our bodies react to milk in ways that are easily measured. Two common tests for adults are: Doctors can also take a stool sample from babies and young children. You may still be able to eat or drink small amounts of milk. Some people do better if they have their dairy with a meal. And, some dairy products, like hardcheeseor yogurt, may be easier to digest. Also, there are lots of lactose-free dairy products at the supermarket. Or you can take commonly found over-the-countersupplements(likeLactaid) to break down the milk sugars if you still want the real thing. Talk to your doctor about a liquid lactase replacement. These are over-the-counter drops that you add to milk. But if you give up milk completely, you can still get plenty ofcalcium,vitamin Dand othernutrientsin a healthy diet. Instead of milk, you can substitute these foods: Always read labels. Many foods have lactose, includingsnackfoods, bakery products, candy, dry mixes, dried vegetables, andinfantformulas. Many medicines also have lactose, which is used as a filler, especially in white tablets. Manybirth control pillsandmedicationsused to treat gas andstomachacid contain lactose. Your doctor orpharmacistcan let you know if any prescription medications you take contain lactose. Some high-lactose foods to watch out for: Some milk substitutes you could try: If you have symptoms of lactose intolerance, see your doctor. And if you’re diagnosed with it, talk with them about how to be sure you’re eating right. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Lactose Intolerance.” Mayo Clinic: “Lactose intolerance.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Lactose intolerance.” National Institutes of Health: “Lactose intolerance.” National Institutes of Health:  “Evolution of lactase persistence: an example of human niche construction.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: "Definition & Facts for Lactose Intolerance." Foodreactions.org: “Hidden Milk and Lactose.” Go Dairy Free: “How to Substitute Milk (Skim, Low Fat, Whole).” International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: “Lactose Intolerance.” FDA: “Problems Digesting Dairy Products?”   Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.