Newbornjaundiceis a common and usually harmless condition in which your newbaby's skinandeyeslook yellow. About 60% of babies get it. Jaundice happens when too much bilirubin, a chemical that redblood cellsrelease during their normal breakdown process, builds up in the blood. Sometimes it goes away on its own, or your doctor may suggest light therapy or other treatments to knock it out. Some of the body's red blood cells break down every day and create bilirubin in the blood. It's the liver's job to filter it out of the bloodstream. When yourbabyis still in your womb, yourliverclears out their bilirubin for them. After birth, your baby's liver takes over. Sometimes, your newborn's liver can't break down bilirubin as quickly as their body makes it, and it starts to build up. Because bilirubin is a yellow compound, it turns your baby's skin andeyesyellow. It can also happen if the bile ducts are blocked or scarred, a condition called biliary atresia. Babies have a greater chance of getting jaundice if they’re: Jaundice typically shows up 2 or 3 days after yourbabyis born and goes away within the first couple of weeks. Some types may show up sooner or much later. Breastfeedingjaundicehappens because yourbabyisn’t eating enough. Your milk may not have come in yet or your baby is having trouble latching on. The more your baby eats, the more quickly their body clears waste, including bilirubin, from their system. Breastmilk jaundiceappears after the first week. Doctors don’t know exactly why it happens, but they think something in breast milk keeps your baby’s liver from processing bilirubin effectively. This kind of jaundice can last for several months. More serious kinds of jaundice are caused by a disease or condition, such as: Jaundice may also happen if a mom has a different blood type from their baby. If that's your situation, your body may make antibodies that attack and break down your baby's red blood cells. In some cases, you can help prevent this by getting special shots when you'repregnant.  The telltale sign of jaundice is a yellow color to your baby's skin and yellow in the whites of theireyes. It typically starts on the face. Once bilirubin levels in the blood get higher, the yellow color moves to the chest andstomach, and then, finally, the legs and arms. Jaundice may be harder to notice on dark skin, so check the whites of your baby's eyes and under your baby's tongue to see if those areas look yellowish. Severe jaundice can be an emergency situation, so call your doctor right away if: Usually, a doctor can tell your baby has jaundice by looking. But they’ll also want to know how much bilirubin is in your baby's blood to help decide on a treatment plan. They may: If your doctor suspects that a condition is causing your baby's jaundice, they may do other tests, like: In many cases, jaundice goes away on its own in 1 to 2 weeks. Your doctor will decide whether your baby should wait it out or start treatments like: Extra feedings.Taking in more breast milk orformulawill help your babypoopmore often, which can help clear out bilirubin from the body. Or, if your baby is having troublebreastfeeding, your doctor may recommend you feed them breast milk from a bottle or also feed them formula. Phototherapy.The doctor puts your baby under blue-green lights. It can help bilirubin leave their body in their urine. They'll wear a diaper only so that most of their skin can soak up the light. They’ll wear patches to protect their eyes. The light may come from a special pad or mattress that puts out blue-green light. Intravenousimmunoglobulin(IVIg).If your baby's jaundice happens because they have a different blood type from their mom, your doctor may need to give them a blood protein through an IV that helps stop the breakdown of red blood cells. Exchange transfusion.If your baby has severe jaundice that isn't getting better with other methods, they may need ablood transfusioncalled an exchange transfusion. In this process, your doctor repeatedly draws small amounts of your baby's blood and replaces it with blood from a donor. Your baby will need to stay in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for the procedure. It's rare for babies to need this level of treatment for jaundice. Don’t hesitate to get your baby checked if you notice signs of jaundice. It’s rare, but if severe jaundice is left untreated, bilirubin can enter thebrainand cause permanent damage. This condition is called kernicterus, a complication that includes: There isn't much you can do to prevent the typical jaundice in newborns. But you can help move it along by being sure your baby is well fed. If you're breastfeeding, aim for 8-12 feedings a day in the first days of your baby's life. If you're formula feeding, offer 1-2 ounces every 2-3 hours. Exposing your baby to sunlight also helps break down indirect bilirubin. Sit by the window indoors with your baby or take your baby for a stroll in the stroller if it is a nice day with sunshine. Photo Credit: E+ / Getty Images. SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: "Jaundice in Newborns Q&A." CDC: "Jaundice Alert: What Every Parent Needs to Know," “Breastfeeding,” “What are Jaundice and Kernicterus?” Kids Health: "Jaundice in Healthy Newborns." Mayo Clinic: "Infant Jaundice." Merck Manual: “Jaundice in the Newborn.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Kernicterus.” Healthy Children: "Jaundice in Newborns: Parent FAQs." FamilyDoctor.org: "Infant Jaundice."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.