If you have high cholesterol, you have a higher risk ofcardiovascular disease. That can include coronary heart disease,stroke, and peripheralvascular disease. High cholesterol has also been tied todiabetesandhigh blood pressure. In all cases, the underlying cause is that high cholesterol leads to fatty plaques that build up in arteries all over your body. To prevent or manage these conditions, work with your doctor. You also can take some simple steps that will help you lower your cholesterol -- and your risk of these related diseases. To understand how cholesterol can lead to diseases, it helps to understand how cholesterol works. There are different types of cholesterol: Triglycerides. These are fats from the food you eat that circulate in your body, which can be stored infatcells. Triglycerides aren’t actually a type of cholesterol, but their levels are measured along with HDL and LDL to see if you are at risk for, or have,atherosclerosis. (That's when fatty deposits build up in your artery walls, restricting blood flow and leading to a variety of issues like aneurysms and heart attacks.) The main risk from high cholesterol is coronary heart disease, which can lead to death from a heart attack. If your cholesterol level is too high, cholesterol can build up in the walls of yourarteries. Over time, this buildup -- called plaque -- causesarteries to harden and can restrict blood flow (atherosclerosis). Arteries that feed the heart can narrow in certain areas and slowbloodflow to part of theheartmuscle. Or cholesterol plaques break off and float to smaller blood vessels and cause a partial or total blockage. Sometimes inflammatory cells might go to the broken plaque area and cause a narrowing there as well. Reduced blood flow can result inchest paincalled angina, or in aheart attackif a blood vessel gets blocked completely. Cholesterol plaques don’t just line your blood vessels in and around your heart. They also narrow certain arteries that lead to yourbrain. If a vessel carrying blood to the brain is blocked completely, you could have astroke. In addition to your heart and your brain, cholesterol plaque can cause symptoms in your legs and other areas outside of your heart and brain (peripheral vascular disease). Legs and feet are most common. You might notice cramps in your calves when you walk that get better with rest. This is like angina -- it works the same way -- but in your legs instead of your heart. If you have diabetes, that can upset the balance between levels of HDL, or “good” cholesterol, and LDL or “bad”cholesterol. People with diabetes tend to haveLDLparticles that stick to arteries and damage blood vessel walls more easily. Glucose (a type of sugar) attaches to your lipoproteins, which are particles that carry cholesterol and triglycerdies to your cells.  SugarcoatedLDLremains in the bloodstream longer and may help plaque form. People with diabetes, especiallytype 2 diabetes, can have low HDL and hightriglyceridelevels. Both of these boost the risk of heart and artery diseases. If you havediabetesand have low levels of good cholesterol but high levels of bad cholesterol and high triglycerides, you have a condition called diabetic dyslipidemia. Up to 70% of people with type 2 diabetes have diabetic dyslipidemia. People withtype 1 diabeteswho have their blood sugar under control usually have normal levels of cholesterol. If they’reoverweightor haveobesity, though, they’re more likely to have high cholesterol. But that’s true for people without type 1 diabetes, too. There's a link between high cholesterol andhigh blood pressure, or hypertension. High cholesterol seems to trigger inflammation and the release of certain hormones that causes blood vessels to tighten up. When that happens it's called “endothelial dysfunction." Your blood pressure goes up because your heart has to work harder to pump blood through it. High blood pressure is also linked to heart disease. Erectile dysfunction is when a person can’t achieve or maintain an erection during sex. Over the long term, high cholesterol seems to trigger a narrowing of the smaller blood vessels of the penis when they should be stretching to allow more blood for an erection (endothelial dysfunction again). In addition, when you have too much LDL cholesterol, it can build up in arteries and then join with other substances to form plaque that hardens and narrows further blood vessels (atherosclerosis). The result can be less blood flow to both the heart and the penis, which can lead to erectile dysfunction. A few simple changes can lower your cholesterol and cut your risk for conditions linked to high cholesterol. These groups offer more information about treating and preventing cardiovascular disease and other conditions linked to high cholesterol. American Heart AssociationThis organization is dedicated to advocacy and education about heart disease. American Stroke AssociationThis agency teaches you to reduce your risk of stroke and make positive lifestyle changes. InterAmerican Heart FoundationThis group works in Latin America and the Caribbean to lower disability and death from heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and other related conditions. National Heart, Lung, and Blood InstituteThis government agency supports research on the causes, prevention, and treatment of cardiovascular,lung, and blood diseases. SOURCES: National Institutes of Health. American Academy of Family Physicians. American Heart Association: “Cholesterol and Diabetes.” InterAmerican Heart Foundation” “Who We Are.” Cleveland Clinic:  “Cholesterol: High Cholesterol Diseases,” “Cholesterol-Lowering Drugs.," "Heart Disease & Erectile Dysfunction," "High Cholesterol Diseases," "Lipoproteins."“Triglycerides & Heart Health." Stanford Health Care: "Endothelial Dysfunction." American Journal of Cardiovascular Drugs:"Hypercholesterolemia and Hypertension: Two Sides of the Same Coin." Mayo Clinic: “Atherosclerosis," "Type 2 Diabetes.” World Journal of Diabetes:“Management of Diabetic Dyslipidemia: An Update.” Diabetes Care:“Dyslipidemia Management in Adults With Diabetes.” Diabetologia:“Pathology of Diabetic Dyslipidaemia: Where Are We?” Annales Universitatis Mariae Curie-Skłodowska:“Blood Lipids Profile in Obese or Overweight Patients.”  Can they help lower yours? What it can do for you. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.