Many parts of your body -- including youreyes,brain, innerear, and nerves in yourfeetand spine -- work together to keep you balanced. When a part of that system is off, you can feel dizzy. It can be a sign of something serious, and it can be dangerous if it makes you fall. Your doctor will look at all your symptoms and overall health to figure out what's going on and how to treat it. Get medical attention immediately if you're dizzy and youfaint, fall, or can't walk or have any of the following: Does it feel like you're spinning or the room is moving around you? That's a classic sign of a particular type of dizziness calledvertigo. It's more than feeling off-kilter and usually gets worse when you move your head. This is a symptom that there is an issue in the inner ear or part of the brainstem governing balance. The most common kind is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or BPPV. Your inner ear is a complicated system of canals filled with fluid. These let yourbrainknow how your head is moving. With BPPV, tiny bits ofcalciumin part of your inner ear get loose and move to places they don't belong. The system doesn't work the way it should and sends yourbrainthe wrong signals. It's often caused by the natural breakdown of cells that happens with age. A head injury can cause it, too. You'll feel it briefly when you tilt or turn your head, and especially when you roll over in bed or sit up. BPPV isn't serious and usually goes away on its own. If not -- or you'd like to help it along -- it can be treated with special head exercises ("particle repositioning exercises") called theEpley maneuverto get the pieces of calcium back in place. Most people feel better after one to three treatments. There are other causes of vertigo both in and outside the brain. You can have Meniere disease (described below), labyrinthitis (described below), a tumor called an acoustic neuroma or side effects from some antibiotics. In the brain, it can be caused by a vestibular migraine,multiple sclerosis, malformations of brain structures or a stroke from lack of blood flow or bleed (hemorrhage) in the cerebellum. Inflammationof the nerves in your ears also can cause vertigo. It can be either vestibular neuritis or labyrinthitis. Vestibular neuritis refers to inflammation of your vestibular nerve only while labyrinthitis involved both your vestibular nerve and your cochlear nerve. Both conditions are caused by an infection. Usually, a virus is to blame. But bacteria from a middle ear infection ormeningitiscan make their way into your inner ear as well. In this case, dizziness usually comes on suddenly. Your ears may ring, and it may be hard to hear. You also may be nauseated and have a fever andear pain. Symptoms can last several weeks. If it's caused by a virus and can't be treated withantibiotics,medicationcan help make you feel better as the infection runs its course. This condition brings on intense periods of vertigo that can last hours. You may feel fullness or pressure in one ear. Other symptoms include ringing in your ears,hearing loss, and nausea. You may feel exhausted after the attack passes. People with Meniere's disease have too much fluid in their inner ear. Doctors don't know what causes it, and there's no cure for it. It's usually treated with diet changes (a low-salt diet) and medicine to control the dizziness. Dizziness can be a sign of a problem with yourbloodflow. Your brain needs a steady supply of oxygen-richblood. Otherwise, you can become lightheaded and even faint. Some causes of low blood flow to the brain includeblood clots,clogged arteries, heart failure, and anirregular heartbeat. For many older people, standing suddenly can cause a sharp drop inblood pressure. It's important to get medical help immediately if you're dizzy and faint or lose consciousness. Several drugs list dizziness as a possible side effect. Check with your doctor if you take:  Many people don't drink enough fluids to replace the liquid they lose every day when they sweat,breathe, and pee. It's particularly a problem for older people and people with diabetes. When you're severely dehydrated, your blood pressure can drop, your brain may not get enough oxygen, and you'll feel dizzy. Other symptoms ofdehydrationinclude thirstiness, tiredness, and darkurine. To help withdehydration, drink plenty ofwateror diluted fruit juice, and limitcoffee,tea, and soda. People withdiabetesneed to check the amount ofsugar(glucose) in their blood often. You can get dizzy if it drops too low. That also can cause hunger, shakiness,sweating, and confusion. Some people without diabetes also have trouble withlow blood sugar, but that's rare. A quick fix is to eat or drink something with sugar, like juice or a hard candy. Dizziness can be a sign of many other illnesses, including: You may have other symptoms besides dizziness with any of these conditions. If your dizziness won’t go away or impacts your ability to function, make sure to discuss it with your doctor to find out the cause and treat it. SOURCES: The Cleveland Clinic: "Dizziness." Lewis, J.Merck Manual,2016. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders: "Meniere's Disease." National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease: "Low Blood Glucose (Hypoglycemia)." National Health Service: "Dizziness (lightheadedness)." Vestibular Disorders Association: "Causes of Dizziness." Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.