Back paincan sneak up on you when you least expect it. One minute you're sitting comfortably in front of the TV, and the next you try to stand up, and -- ouch! -- a sharppainradiates through your lower back. Could you have a slipped or herniated disk? You might. The adultspineis made up of 24 bones called vertebrae. Some of the vertebrae are cushioned by soft disks made of a jellylike substance. These disks allow you to move your spine around and bend over. But if a disk between two vertebrae starts slipping out of place, it can irritate the surrounding nerves and cause extreme pain. The condition is called a slipped, ruptured, or herniated disk. One sign may be where the pain is. Although herniated disks can happen in any part of your spine, they are most common in the lower part of your backbone (the lumbar spine), just above your hips. The pain may spread from your back to your buttocks, thighs, and even to yourcalves. Discomfort from a herniated disk usually gets worse when you're being active and lessens when you're resting. Evencoughing,sneezing, and sitting can worsen your symptoms because they put pressure on pinched nerves. A herniated disk also can give you a feeling of tingling or numbness. The affected part of your back may also feel weak. Age also plays a role. As you get older, your disks tend to break down and lose their cushioning. That makes a herniated disk more likely. The best way to tell if you have a herniated disk is to see your doctor. They’ll likely do aphysical examto find the source of your pain. This usually is the only test you’ll need to confirm a diagnosis. Your doctor will check your back for sore or painful spots. They may ask you to lie on your back and lift or move your legs in certain ways. If you feel pain, it’s likely a herniated disk. They may also check: If your doctor wants to rule out other sources of your pain, or pinpoint specific nerves that are aggravated, they may do further testing, including:  SOURCES: Medline Plus: "Herniated Disk." Mayo Clinic: "Herniated Disk" Weill Cornell Brain and Spine Center: "Herniated Disk." American Association of Neurological Surgeons: "Herniated Disk." Radiological Society of North America: "Myelography,""Computed Tomography (CT) -- Spine," "Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) -- Spine." North American Spine Society: "Specialized Nerve Tests: EMG, NCV and SSEP." OrthoInfo: “Herniated Disk in the Lower Back.” Cedars Sinai: “Anatomy of the Spine.” Is a firm mattress best for back pain? Maybe not. Learn about surgery options, possible risks, and recovery. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.