Duane syndrome (DS) is a rareeyedisorder some people are born with. The muscles and nerves around youreyedon't work well together, and that keeps it from moving as it should. The disorder is also known as Duane's syndrome, Duane retraction syndrome, or Stilling-Turk syndrome. It happens when the nerves that control theeyemuscles don't grow normally during pregnancy or are missing. As a result, some muscles stretch when they should tighten or stay loose when they need to squeeze. DS doesn't cause blindness and doesn't usually lead to other health issues. In very rare cases, it has been linked to problems with bones, eyes,ears,kidneys, and the nervous system. Most of the time, only one eye is affected -- usually the left one. But 20% of people have trouble with both eyes. Women are slightly more likely to have DS than men. There are three types of DS:  Signs of DS can include: Some people with DS also havedouble visionand headaches. You might also haveneck painas a result of tilting our head. DS can be passed down in families, but this is rare. Ninety percent of the people who have it are the only ones in their family with it. Experts believe something happens to cause DS between the third and eighth week of pregnancy. This is when a baby's eye nerves and muscles start to develop. There's probably more than one factor involved, like problems with certain genes or the mother being exposed to something in the environment. But it isn't clear what actually causes DS. Because DS has clear symptoms, most people are diagnosed before age 10. The exam usually includes a close look at your eye along with avisiontest and measurements of how far your eye can move. The doctor also may want to do a hearing test and examine yourspine, the roof of your mouth, and your hands. A gene called CHN1 is linked to some cases of DS. A genetic test can look for changes, or mutations, in the gene that might be passed on to other family members. This is done with abloodtest. There's no cure for DS. But your doctor can do things to help your eyes line up when you're looking straight ahead and to protect your vision. Prescription glasses orcontact lensescan also help. Your doctor might recommend that you wear a patch over the eye you see best with to help avoidlazy eye, or amblyopia. This forces your weaker eye to get stronger. Your doctor may also prescribe special lenses for glasses that shift your vision so you can hold your head in a more natural way. It's important to have regulareye exams-- young children may need to see their doctor every 3 to 6 months so a lazy eye can be treated right away. In severe cases, your doctor may recommend surgery to help other muscles in your eye make up for the ones that are affected. This won't give you normal eye motion, but it usually reduces the head turning. SOURCES: Boston Children's Hospital: "Duane Syndrome in Children." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Duane Syndrome." Andrews, C.Gene Reviews,May 25, 2007. American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus: "Duane Syndrome," "Amblyopia," "Abnormal Head Position." National Human Genome Research Institute: "Learning About Duane Syndrome." American Academy of Ophthalmology/EyeWiki: "Duane Retraction Syndrome." Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.