Muscular dystrophies are a group of diseases that make muscles weaker and less flexible over time.Duchenne muscular dystrophy(DMD) is the most common type. It’s caused by flaws in the gene that controls how the body keeps muscles healthy. The disease almost always affects boys, and symptoms usually begin early in childhood. Children with DMD have a hard time standing up, walking, and climbing stairs. Many eventually need wheelchairs to get around. They can also haveheartandlungproblems. Although there isn't a cure, the outlook for people with DMD is better than it has ever been. Years ago, children with the disease usually didn’t live beyond their teens. Today, they live well into their 30s, and sometimes into their 40s and 50s. There are therapies that can ease symptoms, and researchers are looking for new ones, as well. DMD is caused by a problem in one of your genes. Genes contain the information your body needs to make proteins, which carry out many different body functions. If you have DMD, the gene that makes a protein called dystrophin is broken. This protein normally keeps muscles strong and protects them from injury. The condition is more common in boys because of the way parents pass DMD genes to their children. It’s what scientists call a sex-linked disease because it’s connected to the groups of genes, called chromosomes, that determine if a baby is a boy or a girl. It’s rare, but sometimes people who don't have a family history of DMD get the disease when their genes get defects on their own. If your child has DMD, you’ll probably notice the first signs before they turn 6 years old. Muscles in the legs are usually some of the first affected, so they’ll probably start to walk much later than other children their age. Once they can walk, they may fall down often and have trouble climbing stairs or getting up from the floor. After a few years, they might also begin to waddle or walk on their toes. DMD also can damage the heart, lungs, and other parts of the body. As they get older, your child might have other symptoms, including: The muscle problems can causecrampsat times, but in general, DMD isn’t painful. Your child will still have control of theirbladderand bowels. Although some children with the disorder have learning and behavior problems, DMD doesn’t affect your child’s intelligence. You should let your child’s doctor know about the symptoms you’ve been noticing. They’ll want to know your child’s medical history, then ask questions about their symptoms, like: The doctor will give your child aphysical exam, and they may do some tests to rule out other conditions that can cause muscle weakness. If the doctor suspects DMD, they’ll do some other tests, including: If your child has DMD, you’ll want to get as much information about their condition as you can. Think about asking: There’s no cure for DMD, but there are medicines and other therapies that can ease your child’s symptoms, protect their muscles, and keep their heart and lungs healthy. Eteplirsen(Exondys 51)  has been approved to treat individuals with a specific mutation of the gene that leads to DMD. It is an injection medication. Its most common side effects are balance problems and vomiting. Although the drug increases dystrophin production, which would predict improvement in muscle function, this has not yet been shown. The oral corticosteroiddeflazacort(Emflaza) was approved in 2017 to treat DMD, becoming the first FDA approval of any corticosteroid to treat the condition. Deflazacort has been found to help patients retain muscle strength as well as helping them maintain their ability to walk. Common side effects include puffiness, increased appetite and weight gain. Steroids such asprednisoneslow muscle damage. Children who take this medicine are able to walk for 2 to 5 years longer than they would without it. The drugs also can help your child’s heart and lungs work better. Because DMD can cause heart problems, it's important for your child to see a heart doctor, called a cardiologist, for checkups once every 2 years until age 10, and once a year after that. Girls and women who carry the gene have a higher risk of heart problems, too. They should see a cardiologist in their late teens or early adult years to check for any problems. For the small number of DMD patients with the gene mutation exon 45 skipping, the injectable casimersen (Amondys 45) has been appropved. It is the first targeted treatment for this type of mutation and has been shown to help increase the production of dystophin. A small number of children with DMD may also have a gene mutation that is amenable to exon 53 Skipping. The druggolodirsen(Vyondys 53) has been approved to help increase the amount of dystophin in the muscle fibers. Someblood pressuremedicines may help protect against muscle damage in the heart. Kids with DMD might need surgery to fix shortened muscles, straighten the spine, or treat a heart or lung problem. Scientists continue to look for new ways to treat DMD inclinical trials. These trials test new drugs to see if they are safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine that isn't available to everyone. Your doctor can tell you if one of these trials might be a good fit for your child. It’s overwhelming to learn that your child has DMD. Remember that the disease doesn’t mean they can’t go to school, play sports, and have fun with friends. If you stick with their treatment plan and know what works for your child, you can help them live an active life. As your child gets older, their muscles will become weaker and they most likely won’t be able to walk. Many boys with DMD will need a wheelchair by the time they are 12 years old to help them get around. Although some kids live only into their teens, the outlook for this condition is much better than it used to be. Today, young adults with DMD can go to college, have careers, marry, and start families. Scientists are also testing new ways to treat the genes that cause DMD. These treatments might soon improve the outlook for even more for people with DMD. In 2019, the FDA approved golodirsen injection (Vyondys 53,) as the first treatment for DMD in patients with a confirmed mutation amenable to exon 53 skipping and in 2014, officials in Europe approved ataluren (Translarna) as the first drug to treat the genetic cause of DMD. A few other gene therapies may soon be ready for sale in the U.S. To learn more about Duchenne muscular dystrophy or find a support group in your area, visit:Cure Duchenne, theMuscular Dystrophy Association, or theParent Project Muscular Dystrophy. SOURCES: Bushby, K.Lancet Neurology, November 2009. MDA: "Overview," "Signs and Symptoms," "Medical Management." National Human Genome Research Institute: "Learning About Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Muscular Dystrophy Information Page." Cure Duchenne: “Ataluren becomes the world’s first approved treatment for Duchenne muscular dystrophy.” FDA News Release. "FDA grants accelerated approval to first drug for Duchenne muscular dystrophy." Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.