Dupuytren'sdisease, also called Dupuytren’s contracture,  is an abnormal thickening and tightening of the normally loose and flexible tissue beneath theskinof the palm and fingers, called fascia. The pinkie and ring fingers are most often affected. Both hands are usually involved, although one may have worse symptoms than the other. The fascia contains strands of fibers, like cords, that run from the palm upward into the fingers. InDupuytren'sdisease, these cords tighten, or contract, causing the fingers to curl forward. In severe cases, it can lead to crippling hand deformities. The signs of Dupuytren’s disease show up in phases: The cause of Dupuytren's disease is unknown, but certain biochemical factors that affect the palm's connective tissue may be involved. Injuries and overuse of the hand don’t cause it. Tendons aren’t affected. However, certain things may make you more likely to develop Dupuytren's contracture. They include: Yourhealth careprovider will ask you questions about your symptoms as well as your overall health, your health history, and your family’s medical history. Then they’ll examine your hands, wrists, and fingers. Diagnosis of Dupuytren's disease typically involves feeling the palm areas to check for nodules and recording how many nodules are found. Your doctor will likely ask you to try to place your hands flat on a table. You may have tests to: Medical staff may also take pictures of your hand to document how it looks. These exams and tests will be repeated over time to determine if the condition is getting worse. There is no cure for Dupuytren's disease. However, the condition isn’t life-threatening, and it may not cause discomfort for many years, if ever. Some people with the condition never need treatment, just monitoring. If it’s painful or interferes with a person's daily activities, there are treatment options, includingmedicationand surgery. Finger splints don’t help people with Dupuytren's disease and may even cause harm.Stretchingthe finger forcefully can actually speed up the inward curling of the finger. Non-surgical treatment Surgical treatment If the condition continues to get worse despite medications and your hand function is severely limited, your doctor may recommend surgery. The two most common types are: You’ll have some hand swelling and discomfort after the procedure. Raising your hand above yourheartlevel and flexing your fingers can help relieve swelling, stiffness, and pain and speed up your recovery. Recovery can take several months. Most people can move their fingers better after traditional Dupuytren's contracture surgery. However, the condition returns in about one in five people who have had this surgery. All surgery comes with risks. Complications of surgery are rare but may include: A procedure called aponeurotomy is an alternative to traditional surgery for Dupuytren's contracture. Instead of an open cut, it uses the sharp end of a needle to cut the thick bands under the skin, which may help you recover faster. However, it doesn’t work as well for people with more serious cases. Overall, there is less risk of complications, but there is a risk of nerve,bloodvessel, or tendon damage. Needle aponeurotomy is even more effective when used in combination with corticosteroid injections. A specialized hand surgeon must perform this procedure. Ask your doctor what type of surgery is best for you. Your doctor may recommend physical therapy after surgery. Dupuytren's contracture isn’t a dangerous condition, but it can be disabling if it becomes severe. Call your doctor for an appointment if: Because Dupuytren’s disease doesn’t usually affect your thumb or index finger, it may not bother you much early on. But it’s still important to see your doctor if you think you may have symptoms. It can get worse over time and eventually keep you from being able to open your hand, hold large objects, or fit your hand into small spaces. SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons website: "Dupuytren's Contracture," “Dupuytren’s Disease.” Dupuytren's Foundation website: "What is Dupuytren's?" American Society for Surgery of the Hand website:"Dupuytren’s disease." American Academy of Family Physicians website: "Dupuytren's Disease: Diagnosis and Treatment." Mayo Clinic: "Dupuytren's Contracture." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.