Dwarfism is when a person is short in stature because of their genes or a medical reason. It’s defined by the advocacy groups Little People of the World Organization (LPOTW) and Little People of America (LPA) as an adult height of 4 feet 10 inches or under, as a result of a medical or genetic condition. Other groups extend the criteria for certain forms of dwarfism to 5 feet, but the average height of an adult with dwarfism is 4 feet. There are two main categories of dwarfism --disproportionateandproportionate. Disproportionate dwarfism is characterized by an average-size torso and shorter arms and legs or a shortened trunk with longer limbs. In proportionate dwarfism, the body parts are in proportion but shortened. In addition to short stature, dwarfism has many other symptoms that can vary depending the type it is. Disproportionate dwarfism symptoms Disproportionate dwarfism usually doesn’t affect intellectual development unless a child has other rare conditions, includinghydrocephalus, or excess fluid around thebrain. Symptoms of disproportionate dwarfism may include: Some people with disproportionate dwarfism have a rare disorder called spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC). Adults with SEDC are around 3 to 4 feet tall and may have these signs too: Proportionate dwarfism symptoms Proportionate dwarfism is caused by a medical condition you have at birth or that develops in childhood that hinders growth and development. One common cause is too-low amounts of growth hormone produced by your pituitary gland. Symptoms of proportionate dwarfism include a smaller head, arms, and legs. But all are in proportion with each other. Organ systems may be smaller too. Other signs of proportionate dwarfism in children are: There are approximately 400 types of dwarfism. Causes of proportionate dwarfism include metabolic and hormonal disorders such as growth hormone deficiency. The most common types of dwarfism, known as skeletal dysplasias, are genetic. Skeletal dysplasias are conditions of abnormal bone growth that cause disproportionate dwarfism. They include: Achondroplasia.The most common form of dwarfism -- accounting for 70% of cases -- achondroplasia occurs in about one out of 26,000 to 40,000 babies and is evident at birth. People with achondroplasia have a relatively long trunk and shortened upper parts of their arms and legs. Other features of achondroplasia include: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasias (SED).A less common form of dwarfism, SED affects approximately one in 95,000 babies. Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia refers to a group of conditions characterized by a shortened trunk, which may not become apparent until a child is between ages 5 and 10. Other features can include: Diastrophic dysplasia.Arare form of dwarfism, diastrophic dysplasia occurs in about one in 100,000 births. People who have it tend to have shortened forearms andcalves(this is known as mesomelic shortening). Other signs can include Turner syndrome.This genetic condition only affects females. It’s caused by a missing or partial X chromosome. Girls withTurner syndromeonly inherit one fully functioning X chromosome from their parents, instead of one from each parent. Skeletal dysplasiais caused by a genetic mutation. The gene mutation can occur spontaneously or can be inherited. Diastrophic dysplasiaand usuallyspondyloepiphyseal dysplasiasare inherited in a recessive manner. This means a child must receive two copies of the mutated gene -- one from the mother, one from the father -- to be affected. Achondroplasia, on the other hand, is inherited in a dominant manner. That means a child needs only one copy of the mutated gene to have that form of skeletal dysplasia. There is a 25% chance that a child born to a couple in which both parents have achondroplasia will be of normal height. But there is also a 25% chance the child will inherit both dwarfism genes, a condition known as double-dominant syndrome. This is a fatal condition that usually results inmiscarriage. Often parents of children with achondroplasia do not carry the mutated gene themselves. The mutation in the child occurs spontaneously at the time ofconception. Doctors do not know what causes a gene to mutate. It is a seemingly random occurrence that can happen in anypregnancy. When average-size parents have a child with dwarfism due to a spontaneous mutation, it is not likely that other children will also have the mutation. In addition to genetic skeletal dysplasia, short stature has other causes, including disorders of the pituitary, which influence growth andmetabolism;kidney disease; and problems that affect the body's ability to absorb nutrients. Some forms of dwarfism are evident in utero, at birth, or during infancy and can be diagnosed through X-rays and a physical exam. A diagnosis of achondroplasia, diastrophic dysplasia, or spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia can be confirmed throughgenetic testing. In some cases,prenatal testingis done if there is concern for specific conditions. Sometimes dwarfism doesn't become evident until later in a child's life, when dwarfism signs lead parents to seek a diagnosis. Here are signs and symptoms to look for in children that indicate a potential for dwarfism: Doctors may also use these tests to help diagnose dwarfism: Appearance.Children with possible dwarfism may have changes to their skeleton or facial structures as they develop. Chart comparisons.At regular check-ups, your child’s height, weight, and head circumference will be measured and compared to percentiles for standard development for their age. If your child shows any signs of abnormal growth, they may need more frequent measurements. Imaging.Doctors may spot signs of achondroplasia, such as shorter limbs, or other causes of dwarfism on ultrasounds of a fetus during pregnancy. X-rays of babies or children may show that their arms or legs are not growing at a normal rate, or that their skeleton shows signs of dysplasia. MRI scans can show any abnormalities of the pituitary gland or hypothalamus, which affect hormone production. Genetic testing.DNA tests may be done before or after birth to look for genetic mutations linked to dwarfism. Girls with suspected Turner syndrome may need DNA tests to check their X chromosomes. DNA testing may help parents with family planning if they wish to have more children. Family history.Pediatricians may check the height and size of other family members, such as siblings, to compare with the child with suspected dwarfism. Hormone tests.Tests of growth hormone levels can confirm if they’re low. Early diagnosis and treatment can help prevent or lessen some of the problems associated with dwarfism. People with dwarfism related to growth hormone deficiency can be treated with growth hormone. For children five years of age and older with achondroplasia who still have the potential for growth, the FDA has approvedvosoritide(Voxzogo) to help stimulate bone growth. In many cases, people with dwarfism have orthopaedic or medical complications. Treatment of those can include: Other treatment may include: Disproportionate dwarfism causes changes to the limbs, back, and head size that could cause complications like these: Proportionate dwarfism may cause you to have smaller or less developed organs. Girls with Turner syndrome may have heart problems. Kids with lower growth hormone levels or Turner syndrome may have emotional or social problems due to delays in sexual development. Women with disproportionate dwarfism may have pregnancy complications, such as respiratory problems. They almost always need to deliver their babies by C-section, as the shape of their pelvis makesvaginal deliverytoo difficult. Anyone with dwarfism may encounter people who call them names or don’t understand their condition. Kids with dwarfism who have lower self-esteem may need emotional support from their parents to deal with their feelings. SOURCES: Texas Woman's University: "Dwarfism." Little People of America: "Frequently Asked Questions." Nemours Foundation: "Dwarfism." March of Dimes: "Quick References: Fact Sheets: Achondroplasia." The University of Delaware: "Dwarfism." Mayo Clinic: “Dwarfism.” Rady Children’s Hospital: “Genetic, Chromosomal, and Metabolic Conditions: Dwarfism.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.