Dystoniais a movement disorder in which a person's muscles contract uncontrollably. The contraction causes the affected body part to twist involuntarily, resulting in repetitive movements or abnormal postures. Dystonia can affect one muscle, a muscle group, or the entire body. Dystonia affects about 1% of the population, and women are more prone to it than men. Symptoms of dystonia can range from very mild to severe. Dystonia can affect different body parts, and often the symptoms of dystonia progress through stages. Some early symptoms include: Stress orfatiguemay bring on the symptoms or cause them to worsen. People with dystonia often complain of pain and exhaustion because of the constant musclecontractions. If dystonia symptoms occur in childhood, they generally appear first in the foot or hand. But then they quickly progress to the rest of the body. After adolescence, though, the progression rate tends to slow down. When dystonia appears in early adulthood, it typically begins in the upper body. Then there is a slow progression of symptoms. Dystonias that start in early adulthood remain focal or segmental: They affect either one part of the body or two or more adjacent body parts. Most cases of dystonia do not have a specific cause. Dystonia seems to be related to a problem in the basal ganglia. That's the area of thebrainthat is responsible for initiating muscle contractions. The problem involves the way the nerve cells communicate. Acquired dystonia is caused by damage to the basal ganglia. The damage could be the result of: Idiopathic or primary dystonia is often inherited from a parent. Some carriers of the disorder may never develop a dystonia themselves. And the symptoms may vary widely among members of the same family. Dystonias are classified by the body part they affect: Dystonias can also be classified as syndromes based on their patterns: There are several options for treating dystonia. The doctor will determine the course of treatment based on the type of dystonia and its severity. A recently introduced treatment isbotulinum toxin, also calledBotoxorXeomin. The toxin is injected into the affected muscle. There it blocks the effect of the chemical acetylcholine that produces muscle contractions. The injection needs to be repeated about every three months. When dystonia causes someone to become disabled, deepbrainstimulation is an option. With deepbrainstimulation, an electrode is implanted into a particular area in the brain. It is then connected to a battery powered stimulator implanted in the chest. The electrode transmits electrical pulses created by the stimulator to the brain region to reduce the muscular contractions. The person's doctor regulates the frequency and intensity of the electrical pulses. Medications can help reduce the "overdrive" messages that cause muscles to contract excessively in dystonia. Drugs used include: Sensory trick is another option. With sensory trick, stimulation applied to the affected or nearby body part may reduce the muscular contractions. By simply touching this area, people can control their own contractions. Speech therapy, physical therapy, and stress management may also be used to treat the symptoms of dystonia.  SOURCES: Merz Pharmaceuticals, LLC. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Dystonia Fact Sheet." Dystonia Medical Research Foundation: "What is Dystonia?" Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.