Eisenmenger syndromeoccurs as the result of a birth defect you are born with. This particular birth defect is also called a congenital heart abnormality. This birth defect changes the waybloodflows through theheart. It means the body doesn’t get enough oxygen. People with this condition have a high risk ofheart failure,stroke, and premature death. It’s named for Dr. Victor Eisenmenger, who first identified the condition in 1897. Your heart has four chambers -- a left and right atrium and a left and right ventricle. As your heart beats,bloodtravels from the body into the right atrium, which sends it to the right ventricle. The right ventricle pumps the blood to thelungs, where it picks up oxygen. When that oxygen-carrying blood goes back to the heart, the left atrium takes it in and passes it to the left ventricle, which sends it out to your body. But in people with Eisenmenger syndrome, there’s often a hole between chambers – usually between the left and right ventricle. When that happens: If that defect isn’t found and corrected early, it can result in more problems, likehigh blood pressurein your lungs (pulmonary hypertension) andheart failure. Of all the people who are born with a heart defect, about 1 in 12 will develop Eisenmenger syndrome. But that rate may be dropping, because doctors are more able to discover and repair those defects early in life. In most cases, the symptoms show up beforepuberty. Sometimes, they can be spotted during infancy or early childhood. These symptoms are easiest to spot: The condition can also affect the body’s production of red blood cells (they carry oxygen), cause blood clotting or excessive bleeding. If your child’s doctor suspects Eisenmenger syndrome, they might refer them to a specialist who deals with heart problems in children and young adults. That specialist will look for: Your doctor will also want to do: If those tests point to Eisenmenger syndrome, your doctor will talk with you about a treatment plan. The focus will be on lowering blood pressure in thearterythat carries blood to the lungs and getting more oxygen to the body. This can be done in a variety of ways, ranging from drugs to major surgery. The plan might involve taking medicines that: Your doctor may also want you to takeiron supplements. You might also have blood removed from your body to reduce the number of red blood cells, if you’re overproducing them. You’ll be given fluids to make up for the lost blood. In severe cases, doctors might perform a heart-lung transplant. This is done when the heart and lungs are failing. Obviously, this is a major step that requires a sophisticated hospital and experienced surgeons. People with this disease don’t live as long as others, and there’s a high risk of sudden death. Most people with Eisenmenger syndrome die between their 20s and 50s. But with careful management, people with this condition may live into their 60s. If you have Eisenmenger syndrome, you should make sure you’re following your treatment plan. In addition, doctors recommend several steps: If you’re a woman with this disease,getting pregnantcan put your life and your unborn baby’s life at risk. Doctors will most likely recommend against it. This is a life-changing condition, and facing up to its challenges and emotional toll can be hard. You should talk with your doctor about support groups and other resources that may be available to you and your loved ones. SOURCES: National Institutes of Health, Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center. National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Eisenmenger Syndrome.” The Mayo Clinic: “Eisenmenger Syndrome.” Adult Congenital Heart Association: “Eisenmenger Syndrome.” University of Rochester Medical Center Health Encyclopedia: “Eisenmenger Syndrome.” European Heart Journal: “Presentation, survival prospects, and predictors of death in Eisenmenger syndrome.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.