Within your skull, there’s a small, bony nook at the base of yourbrainthat holds and protects your pituitary gland (which controls how hormones work in your body). This tiny structure is called the sella turcica. In a small number of people, the sella turcica is shaped in such a way that spinal fluid can leak into it. The buildup of spinal fluid squashes the pituitary gland flat, so it looks like your sella turcica is empty. This condition is known as primaryempty sella syndrome(ESS) and can also be seen inpseudotumor cerebrii. Your pituitary gland also can be flattened or small because you’ve had surgery orradiationfor a tumor or a serioushead injury. This is called secondary ESS. Neither type affects your overall health, and both are rare. Doctors usually only find ESS when they’re looking for the cause of other problems. Women are more likely to have ESS than men. It’s also more common among people who areobeseor havehigh blood pressure. Most people who have ESS don’t have any signs of it. Some doctors think that fewer than 1% of people who have it have symptoms or problems because of it. When people do have symptoms, these are the most common: Less common ones can include: If you have symptoms of ESS, your doctor will ask about your medical history and recommend an imaging test of yourbrainto see if your sella turcica looks empty. These scans might include:  If you have ESS but it’s not causing any issues for you, you probably won’t need treatment. If you do have symptoms, your doctor may offer:  SOURCES: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Empty sella syndrome information page.” Nemours Foundation: “Endocrine system.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Empty sella syndrome.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Empty sella syndrome.” Pituitary Network Association: “Empty sella syndrome.” Medical Journal, Armed Forces India: “ ‘Empty sella’ on routine MRI studies: An incidental finding or otherwise?” Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.