Endocarditis is a rare, life-threatening inflammation of the lining of theheartmuscle and its valves. It is caused by abacterial infection. Although it can occur in anyone, it is much more common in people with certain heart conditions and in those who've had it before. If your risk is high, you can take steps to lower it. In 2007, the American Heart Association Endocarditis Committee -- together with other experts -- issued guidelines to help prevent endocarditis. These replaced guidelines issued in 1997. After reviewing published studies, the committee found that only a small number of cases of infective endocarditis might be prevented byantibioticsfor dental procedures. In patients with heart conditions associated with the highest risk of serious complications from endocarditis, it says that antibiotic treatment before dental procedures involving manipulation of the gums seems reasonable. In very rare cases, bacteria in the mouth may trigger endocarditis in people at higher risk. Here's what happens: Bacteria found intoothplaquemay multiply and causegingivitis(gum disease). If not treated, this may become advanced. The gums become inflamed (red and swollen) and often bleed duringtoothbrushing, flossing, or certain dental procedures involving manipulation of the gums. When gums bleed, the bacteria can enter the bloodstream and can infect other parts of the body. In the case of endocarditis, this affects the inner lining of the heart and the surfaces of its valves. The bacteria stick to these surfaces and create growths or pockets of bacteria. Because this is so rare, the new guidelines suggestantibioticsprior to dental procedures only for patients who are at highest risk for serious complications from endocarditis. In fact, in most cases, the risk of problems from antibiotics exceeds the benefits from preventive antibiotics. These attractbloodproducts that may lead to clots. To prevent endocarditis, patients with certain heart conditions receive a single dose of an antibiotic. You receive it about one hour prior to certain dental treatments. The American Heart Association and American Dental Association now suggest that you receive antibiotics prior to dental treatmentonlyif you have: The new guidelines suggest preventive treatment for all patients with cardiac conditions listed above, but not for all dental procedures. The guidelines suggest treatmentonly: The guidelinesdo notrecommend antibiotics for these dental procedures or events:  Possible symptoms of endocarditis include: Keep in mind that receiving antibiotics greatly lowers the risk of endocarditis. However, it is not a guarantee. Also keep in mind that most cases of procedure-related endocarditis occur within two weeks of the procedure. So if you have any of these symptoms beyond this time, it is not very likely that you have endocarditis. It is always wise to check with your doctor or dentist if you have any concerns. SOURCE:Committee on Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease, Prevention of Infective Endocarditis: "Guidelines From the American Heart Association." Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.