Theendocrine systemis a network of glands that produce and release hormones that help control many important body functions, including the body's ability to change calories into energy that powers cells and organs. The endocrine system influences how yourheartbeats, how your bones and tissues grow, even your ability to make a baby. It plays a vital role in whether or not you developdiabetes,thyroiddisease, growth disorders, sexual dysfunction, and a host of other hormone-related disorders. Each gland of the endocrine system releases specific hormones into your bloodstream. These hormones travel through yourbloodto other cells and help control or coordinate many body processes. Endocrine glands include: Even the slightest hiccup with the function of one or more of these glands can throw off the delicate balance of hormones in your body and lead to an endocrine disorder, or endocrine disease. Endocrine disordersare typically grouped into two categories: The endocrine's feedback system helps control the balance of hormones in the bloodstream. If your body has too much or too little of a certain hormone, the feedback system signals the proper gland or glands to correct the problem. A hormone imbalance may occur if this feedback system has trouble keeping the right level of hormones in the bloodstream, or if your body doesn't clear them out of the bloodstream properly. Increased or decreased levels of endocrine hormone may be caused by: Most endocrine tumors and nodules (lumps) are noncancerous. They usually do not spread to other parts of the body. However, a tumor or nodule on the gland may interfere with the gland's hormone production. There are many different types of endocrine disorders.Diabetesis the most common endocrine disorder diagnosed in the U.S. Other endocrine disorders include: Adrenal insufficiency.The adrenal gland releases too little of the hormone cortisol and sometimes, aldosterone. Symptoms includefatigue,stomachupset,dehydration, andskinchanges.Addison's diseaseis a type of adrenal insufficiency. Cushing's disease.Overproduction of a pituitary gland hormone leads to an overactive adrenal gland. A similar condition calledCushing's syndromemay occur in people, particularly children, who take high doses of corticosteroidmedications. Gigantism (acromegaly) and other growth hormone problems.If the pituitary gland produces too much growth hormone, a child's bones and body parts may grow abnormally fast. If growth hormone levels are too low, a child can stop growing in height. Hyperthyroidism.The thyroid gland produces too much thyroid hormone, leading to weight loss, fast heart rate,sweating, and nervousness. The most common cause for anoveractive thyroidis anautoimmune disordercalled Grave's disease. Hypothyroidism.The thyroid gland does not produce enough thyroid hormone, leading tofatigue,constipation,dry skin, and depression. The underactive gland can cause slowed development in children. Some types ofhypothyroidismare present at birth. Hypopituitarism.The pituitary gland releases little or no hormones. It may be caused by a number of different diseases. Women with this condition may stop getting their periods. Multiple endocrine neoplasia I and II (MEN I and MEN II).These rare, genetic conditions are passed down through families. They cause tumors of the parathyroid, adrenal, and thyroid glands, leading to overproduction of hormones. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).Overproduction of androgens interfere with the development of eggs and their release from the female ovaries. PCOS is a leading cause of infertility. Precocious puberty.Abnormally early puberty that occurs when glands tell the body to release sex hormones too soon in life. If you have an endocrine disorder, your doctor may refer you to a specialist called an endocrinologist. An endocrinologist is specially trained in problems with the endocrine system. The symptoms of an endocrine disorder vary widely and depend on the specific gland involved. However, most people with endocrine disease complain offatigueand weakness. Bloodand urine tests to check your hormone levels can help your doctors determine if you have an endocrine disorder. Imaging tests may be done to help locate or pinpoint a nodule or tumor. Treatment of endocrine disorders can be complicated, as a change in one hormone level can throw off another. Your doctor or specialist may order routine blood work to check for problems or to determine if your medication or treatment plan needs to be adjusted. SOURCES:The American Medical Association: "Endocrine System."Kids Health.org: "Endocrine System."Medline Plus: "Endocrine Diseases."The Hormone Society: "Endocrine System."National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome."American Association of Clinical Chemistry, Lab Tests Online: "Endocrine Syndromes." See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.