Enterovirus D68is a virus that can make you feel like you have a cold. If it's severe, it could also make you wheeze or havetrouble breathing, especially if you have asthma or other respiratory problems. Most cases are mild and last about a week, but if it's severe, you may need to go to the hospital. Babies, children, and teens are the most likely to get it. People with weak immune systems  and those with severe chronic medical conditions have the biggest risk for severe complications. This virus isn't new. Experts first identified it in 1962. In the decades since then, it only seemed to impact a very small number of people. That changed in 2014, when the CDC reported a national outbreak. There are more than 100 other enteroviruses. You could have a fever, arunny nose,sneezing, andcoughing. You might feel achy, too. The virus can also lead to wheezing and trouble breathing, especially in children who haveasthmaor other respiratory problems. It can cause bronchiolitis in babies and toddlers leading to  wheezing and difficulty in breathing. It's very rare, but enteroviruses may cause other serious problems, such as muscle paralysis orinflammationof thebrainorheart. Anyone can get it, but children age 6 weeks to 16 years may be especially vulnerable. Infants and people who haveimmune system disordersare the most likely to develop severe complications. You can catch this virus the same way you would catch the common cold: by having close contact with someone who's infected -- especially if that personcoughsor sneezes on you -- or by touching a contaminated surface. You can lower your chances of getting it by following these tips: A person who is ill should always cover their mouth when coughing/sneezing, wear a mask and wash hands often.  Staying in a separate room in the house helps contain the infection. No medicines target this virus.Antibioticswon't help, since the illness is not caused by bacteria. You can take an over-the-counter pain/fever reliever, which might help you feel a little better, just like with a normal cold. If your symptoms are severe, you should call your doctor or go to the emergency room. If it's an emergency -- for instance, you're having trouble breathing -- call 911. You may need to be hospitalized.  SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians: "Growing Enterovirus Outbreak Ensnaring Children, Teens." CDC: "Enterovirus D68," "Non-Polio Enterovirus," "Severe Respiratory Illness Associated with Enterovirus D68--Missouri and Illinois, 2014." Massachusetts Academy of Family Physicians: "Clinical Advisory Regarding Enterovirus D68." Oberste, M. Journal of General Virology, May 2004. University of California San Francisco: "Rare Polio-Like Disease in California." Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.