Epstein-Barr is the virus that causes mononucleosis. You might know this disease better by its nickname, "mono." It's also called the "kissingdisease" because of one way you can spread it to someone else. Even though Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) isn't a household name, you've probably been infected without knowing it. Lots of people carry the virus but don't get sick. Once you're infected with EBV, symptoms can take 4 to 6 weeks to show up. When they do, they're often mild, especially in young children. Kids' symptoms may be more like those of a cold or flu. Teens often have more obvioussymptoms of mono. If you do get symptoms, most likely you'll have: Although you should start feeling better in 2 to 4 weeks, thefatiguecan stick around much longer. You may still feel tired a couple of months later. The virus is found insaliva, so you can catch mono from kissing someone who’s infected. You can also get it from drinking from the same glass or using an infected person'stoothbrush. It's also found inbloodand semen, so it's possible to get mono from sex, abloodtransfusion, or anorgan transplant. You don't have to be sick to pass the virus to someone else. EBV stays in your body long after you get over mono. The virus can become active again months or years later, making you contagious once more. It's hard to tell whether you have mononucleosis just by your symptoms. Fever,fatigue, andsore throatcould also be signs of other illnesses, like thefluor a cold. See your doctor for an exam to learn for sure what's making you sick. They might find signs that you have mono, such as anenlarged spleen, an organ in your belly that filters blood. Your doctor will also check to see if you have a swollenliverand white patches on yourtonsils. You may also need to get some blood tests. One test looks for antibodies, substances your immune system makes in response to the EBV virus. Another test looks for a type of white blood cell your body uses to fight off the EBV infection. Like other viruses, Epstein-Barr can't be treated withantibiotics. Mono should clear up on its own without treatment in a few weeks. Although no medicine can cure an EBV infection, you can take these steps at home to ease your symptoms: Ease back into work or school, taking things slowly until you feel better. For a month or so, avoid sports, heavy lifting, or other vigorous activities in which you could injure yourspleen. No vaccine can protect you against the EBV virus. The best way to avoid catching it is to stay away from anyone who has mono. Don't share any items, including glasses, silverware, and toothbrushes, with someone who is infected. Also avoid kissing or havingsexwith an infected person. There are some rare complications of mono, so see your doctor if you or your child has any of these symptoms: Also call if your symptoms don't go away after 4 to 6 weeks. You could have another type of infection besides mononucleosis. EBV is best known for causing mononucleosis, but less often it can lead to other diseases, including: Studies also show a link between EBV and multiple sclerosis (MS), but more research is needed to determine if the virus can lead to MS. SOURCES: CDC: "About Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV)." Nemours Foundation: "Mononucleosis." Nationwide Children's Hospital: "Mononucleosis (Infectious)." Cleveland Clinic: "Mononucleosis." American Academy of Pediatrics: "Infectious Mononucleosis." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.