Essential tremoris a nerve disorder that causes shaking that you can’t control in different parts and on different sides of your body. It often affects areas like your hands, arms, head, larynx (voice box),tongue, and chin. The lower body is rarely involved. ET is not life-threatening unless it keeps someone from caring for themselves. Most people are able to live regular lives with this condition, although they may find it hard to do everyday things like eating, dressing, or writing. It’s only when the tremors become severe that they actually cause disability. Doctors don’t understand the true cause of essential tremor, but it’s thought that the unusual electricalbrainactivity that causes it is processed through the thalamus. The thalamus is a structure deep in thebrainthat coordinates and controls muscle activity. Genes cause ET in half of all people with the condition. Someone who has ET will have up to a 50% chance of passing down the responsible gene to their child, but the child may never have symptoms. Although ET is more common in older people -- and symptoms become more serious with age -- it is not a part of the natural aging process. Essential tremor is the most common movement disorder, affecting up to 10 million people in the U.S. ET can happen at any age, but it most often appears during adolescence or in middle age (between ages 40 and 50).  The main symptoms of essential tremor include: Many other factors or diseases can also cause tremors, includingParkinson's disease,multiple sclerosis,fatigueafterexercise, extreme emotional distress,brain tumors, someprescription drugs, metabolic problems, and alcohol or drug withdrawal. Essential tremor is linked to other illnesses. Other movement disorders, such asParkinson's disease, have been associated with ET. Some reports have linked ET withmigraine headaches. People with ET may also be at high risk of having dementia (particularly Alzheimer’s disease). Drugs that treat essential tremor may also make you more likely to become depressed. Some experts think there’s no increased risk for Parkinson's disease for people with ET. Instead, some people diagnosed with ET may be incorrectly diagnosed at first and later turn out to have Parkinson's. A neurologist or movement disorder specialist can usually diagnose essential tremor based on your symptoms and a complete neurological exam. There is no specificblood, urine, or other test used to diagnose ET. As part of the exam, your doctor may consider other causes of tremor, such asthyroiddisease, too muchcaffeine, or medication side effects. Mild essential tremor may not need treatment. But if ET causes problems in your everyday life or if you find it socially unacceptable, treatments may improve symptoms. These can include medications or surgery. Because we don’t know the exact cause of essential tremor, there is no way to prevent it. But knowing that ET has a genetic link gives researchers clues as they look for treatments and prevention. There is no cure for essential tremor, but treatments that ease symptoms may improve your quality of life. These include drugs and surgery that ease tremor. But not every treatment or procedure is effective for every person with ET. Your doctor will recommend a personal treatment plan, including lifestyle changes that may help reduce your tremors. SOURCES: Johns Hopkins Medicine Movement Disorders Center: "What is Essential Tremor?" U.S. National Library of Medicine. American Academy of Neurology. The Movement Disorder Society. Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.