Ewing’ssarcomais a very rare type of cancerous tumor that grows in your bones or the soft tissue around your bones, such as cartilage or the nerves. It usually affects people from the ages of 10 to 20 and has a high rate of being cured. Ewing’s sarcoma affects about 200 children and young adults every year in the United States and shows up slightly more often in males. While adults can get Ewing’s sarcoma, it is uncommon. It mostly affects white people and has rarely been found in African Americans or Asian Americans. The kind of Ewing’s sarcoma you might have can be seen where the tumor forms. The pelvis is where it most often starts, followed by the femur (or thigh bone). Regardless of where it starts, it can spread to other bones, bone marrow, and even vital organs such as thelungs,heart, andkidneys. Some types are: Bone tumor:87% of Ewing’s sarcoma happens in the bone, often appearing in the thigh bones, pelvis, ribs, orshoulderblades. But the tumor can appear in any bone. Soft tissue (extra-osseous) tumor:This type of tumor affects the soft tissues around your bones, such as cartilage or muscle. It’s rarely found in the soft tissue of the arms, legs, head, neck, chest, andabdomen. Peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor (pPNET):This type of tumor is found in the nerves and can be detected in many parts of the body. Askin tumor:This is a type of pPNET tumor that’s found in the chest. It’s unclear what causes Ewing’s sarcoma, as it doesn’t appear to run in families. So far, research suggests that it’s not related to exposure toradiation, chemicals, or other outside things in the environment. It appears that the cell DNA changes after birth, leading to Ewing’s sarcoma. Why that happens remains unknown. One possibility is that it could be a secondcancerin people who’ve been treated with radiation for another type ofcancer. When you have Ewing’s, you may feelpain, swelling, or stiffness in the area of the tumor (arms, legs, chest, back, orpelvis) for weeks or months. This could get mistaken for bumps andbruises. In children, you might mistake it forsports injuries. Other symptoms include: ● A lump nearskinthat feels warm and soft to the touch ● Constant lowfever ● Limping because your legs hurt ● Bone pain that gets worse when youexerciseor during the night ● Broken bones without an obvious cause ●Weight loss ● Always beingtired ● Paralysis or loss ofbladdercontrol if the tumor is near yourspine When you see symptoms, you should contact your doctor so they can do a diagnosis. As with many types ofcancer, the earlier you have it detected and treated, the better. Your doctor has a number of tests to see whether you have Ewing’s sarcoma. If you do, they will also try to find out whether the tumor has spread and to what extent. This is known as staging. Physical exam:Your doctor will start out with this, especially checking around the painful areas for signs such as lumps, redness, and swelling. X-rays:These take an image of a certain area of your body where a tumor is suspected. If the X-rays show any problems, your doctor may order other imaging tests. Bone scan:This is used to find out whether cancer cells are in your bones. A small amount of radioactive dye is injected into one of your veins. The dye will collect in the bones that have tumors. When you lie beneath a bone scanner, the doctor will be able to detect where the radioactive dye has gathered. Magnetic resonance imaging(MRI):For this test, you lie flat and still on a surface that slides you inside the tube-shaped MRI machine. It uses magnetic field and radio waves to create a detailed, 3-D image inside your body. Computed tomography scan(CAT/CT scan):Like you would do for an MRI, you lie flat inside a CT scanner, which takes X-ray pictures while linked to a computer. The MRI is generally preferred over the CT scan. Positron emission tomography scan (PET scan):You lie inside the PET scanner while a technician injects a small amount of radioactivesugarinto a vein. The cancer cells show up brighter in the scan because they use moresugarthan healthy cells. Bloodtest:This cannot confirm Ewing’s sarcoma. But a complete blood count, orCBC, checks how many redblood cells, white blood cells, and how much hemoglobin (aproteinthat carries oxygen) you have. Biopsy:Your doctor removes a piece of your tissue with either a needle or during surgery. That sample is viewed under a microscope to see if it’s cancerous. This can confirm whether you have Ewing’s sarcoma. Bone marrow aspirationand biopsy:Your doctor numbs an area of your body, usually in the hips. They insert a needle and takes a small piece of bone marrow and bone to exam under a microscope. What kind of treatment you get will depend on several things. They include: Treatment options include: Chemotherapy:This is usually the first step. With this option, medicines are used to kill cancer cells and stop them from growing. They can be injected into your bloodstream. Your doctor may use more than one type ofchemotherapyat a time or combine this with surgery and radiation. Surgery:Your doctor will try to remove the tumor to stop its spread. In some cases, they may have toamputatean arm or leg if the tumor has spread a lot. Radiation:In thistherapy, a technician will use X-rays and other types of radiation to kill the cancer cells. This can be done using machines outside the body to deliver the dose, or through needles and tubes sent right to the tumor. If the treatment works, you will still need to follow up with your doctor for many years. Ewing’s sarcoma can return even a decade after the diagnosis. Children with Ewing’s sarcoma that hasn’t spread have cure rates as high as 80%. It’s much lower in cases where the tumor has spread. It’s important to see a doctor right away if you see symptoms in your child. SOURCES: St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital: “Ewing sarcoma.” Harvard Health Publications: “Ewing’s Sarcoma.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Ewing Sarcoma in Adults.” U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Ewing sarcoma.” Mayo Clinic: “Ewing’s sarcoma,” “MRI.” National Cancer Institute: “Ewing Sarcoma Treatment -- Patient Version.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.