Normally your cornea, the clear outer lens or "windshield" of theeye, has a dome shape, like a ball. Sometimes the structure isn’t strong enough to hold its round shape and it bulges outward, like a cone. This is calledkeratoconus. Tiny fibers of protein in youreyecalled collagen help hold your cornea in place. When these fibers get weak, they can’t hold their shape. Your cornea gets more and more cone-like. It happens when you don’t have enough protectiveantioxidantsin your cornea. Its cells produce harmful byproducts, the same way a car puts out exhaust. Normally, antioxidants get rid of them and protect the collagen fibers. But if levels are low, the collagen weakens and the cornea bulges. We don’t know exactly what causes keratoconus. Researchers think that some people are more likely to get it from birth. Several things may have a link to the condition:  Changes to the cornea can make it impossible for your eye to focus without glasses orcontact lenses. In fact, you may need acorneal transplantto restore your sight if the condition gets bad enough. Laservisioncorrection surgery --LASIK-- is dangerous if you have keratoconus. It can weaken your cornea more and make your vision worse. Even if you have only a small degree of keratoconus, don’t get LASIK surgery. Keratoconus changes yourvisionin two ways: As the cornea changes shape from a ball to a cone, the smooth surface becomes wavy. This is called irregularastigmatism. As the front expands, your vision becomes morenearsighted. That means you can see objects clearly only when they’re up close. Anything too far away looks like a blur. Aneye doctormay spot the signs during aneye exam. You should also mention symptoms like:  Your doctor needs to measure the shape of your cornea. There are different ways, but the most common is called corneal topography. The doctor snaps a photo of your cornea and checks it closely. Children of parents with keratoconus should have one every year starting at age 10. You’ll probably start with new glasses. If you have a mild case, neweyeglassesshould clear things up. If they don't, your doctor will suggest contact lenses. Rigid gas permeable contacts are usually the first choice. Over time, you may need other treatments to strengthen your cornea and improve your sight. A treatment calledcornea collagen crosslinkingmay stop the condition from getting worse. Or your doctor could implant a ring called an Intacs under the cornea’s surface to flatten the cone shape and improve vision. When other treatments don’t give you good vision, the last resort is acornea transplant. This is a very safe operation, and it’s successful in more than 90% of cases. The doctor will remove the center of your cornea, replace it with one from a donor, and stitch the new one into place. You may need contact lenses afterward. SOURCES: PubMed Health: "Keratoconus." National Keratoconus Foundation. American Optometric Association: "Keratoconus." Emory Eye Center: "Keratoconus." UpToDate: “Keratoconus.” Mayo Clinic: “Keratoconus.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Keratoconus.” Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.