Fabry disease runs in families. It can have lots of different symptoms, including pain in the hands and feet and a specific kind of rash. When you have Fabry disease, a certain type of fatty substance builds up in the cells of your body. It narrows your blood vessels, which can hurt your skin, kidneys, heart, brain, and nervous system. Your doctor may call Fabry disease a "storage disorder." It usually starts in childhood and is much more common in men than women. Fabry disease is seen in all ethnic, racial, and demographic groups. There are treatments that can make a difference in how you feel, day to day. Getting support from your family and friends is key, too. You get Fabry disease from your parents. It's passed down through genes. The problem is that your body can't make an enzyme called alpha-galactosidase A, which you need to break down fatty substances like oils, waxes, and fatty acids. When you have Fabry disease, you either were born without that enzyme or it doesn’t work right. You may notice things like: Fabry disease can lead to more serious problems, especially in men. Yet females that have the gene for Fabry,  or carriers of the gene, can also have symptoms of Fabry that show up differently. Women with the disease have a significant risk of serious complications from Fabry, as well as organ damage, and should be seen regularly by their doctor or health care providerProblems can include:  It can take a long time to get diagnosed with Fabry disease. That's because the symptoms of Fabry are common to many illnesses and can affect so many different parts of the body. Many people who have Fabry disease don't get diagnosed until years after they first have symptoms. They’ve often seen several different doctors for various symptoms and sometimes get the wrong diagnosis. If your family history suggests you could be at risk for Fabry disease, you may want to ask your doctor about getting genetic testing. When you see the doctor, they’ll do a physical exam and ask you questions like: If your doctor thinks it might be Fabry disease, they’ll ask you to either take a blood test so they can measure the level of alpha-galactosidase A, or take a DNA test. When the doctor says you have Fabry disease, it may be the first time you've heard of it. You probably have a lot of questions, especially if you've been trying to figure out what's causing your symptoms for a long time. You may want to start by asking your doctor questions like these:  There are two drug treatments. The most common is enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). These are given as infusions and replaces the enzyme that’s missing or isn’t working correctly. This allows your body to break down fatty acid substances the way it should. It’ll also help ease the pain and other symptoms that Fabry disease causes. You will probably visit an outpatient center every few weeks to get the enzyme injected into a vein. A newer option is the oral medication migalastat (Galafold). It differs from ERT in that it works to stabilize the enzymes that aren’t working. This also helps ease the effects of the disease on your organs. Because this disease affects the entire body and can damage many organs, your doctor may also recommend: You may need dialysis or a kidney transplant if Fabry disease has caused serious kidney damage. You can also expect to get regular tests to keep track of how you're doing. These may include:  Be good to yourself. Do things that you enjoy, spend time with people who are good company, and save your energy for the things that really matter to you. Part of that may involve saying "no" more often, and letting people know what would help you. Your family and friends may not know much about Fabry disease. Help them understand what's going on with you. Sometimes, when people have serious health conditions, they get depressed or anxious because the condition is a lot to handle. Your doctor should check on how you're feeling, but you may want to bring it up and ask for a referral to a counselor. Talking to someone can help. Although there’s no cure for Fabry disease, treatment can bring your symptoms under control. Even though you may not feel sick or seem to be having any problems, it's important that you follow up with treatments and tests as your doctor suggests. You can find others living with Fabry disease and their caregivers through the Fabry Support & Information Group. SOURCES: Emory University School of Medicine: "Fabry Disease: A Guide for the Newly Diagnosed." Genetics Home Reference, National Institutes of Health: "Fabry disease." Medscape: "Fabry Disease." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Fabry Disease Information Page." NYU Langone Medical Center: "Fabry Disease." Sunder-Plassmann, G.Fabry Disease: Perspectives from 5 Years of FOS, 2006. Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.