 Fatty liver diseasemeans you have extra fat in yourliver. You might hear your doctor call it hepatic steatosis. Heavy drinkingmakes you more likely to get it. Over time, too muchalcoholleads to a buildup of fat inside your liver cells. This makes it harder for your liver to work. But you can get fatty liver disease even if you don’t drink a lot of alcohol. There are two different types of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: Simple fatty liver:This means you have fat in your liver, but you may not have anyinflammationin your liver or damage to your liver cells. It usually doesn’t get worse or causeproblems with your liver. Most people with NAFLD have simple fatty liver. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH):This is much more serious than a simple fatty liver. NASH means you have inflammation in your liver. The inflammation and liver cell damage that happen with NASH can cause serious problems such as fibrosis andcirrhosis, which are types of liver scarring, and liver cancer. About 20% of people with NAFLD have NASH. Alcoholic fatty liver disease is preventable. It usually gets better when you stop drinking alcohol. If you keep drinking, ALD can cause serious problems. These include: Alcohol-related fatty liver disease usually comes first. It can then get worse and become alcoholichepatitis. Over time, it may turn into alcoholic cirrhosis. If you drink heavily, talk with your doctor. It’s confidential, and they can help you get your drinking under control to save your health. With ALD and NAFLD, there are usually no symptoms. Some people may have signs such as tiredness or pain in the upper right side of the belly where your liver is. If you have NASH or get cirrhosis, you may have symptoms such as:  For ALD, the cause is too much alcohol. You may be even more likely to get it if you drink a lot and The reason why some people with NAFLD have simple fatty liver and others get NASH isn’t known. Genes may be a reason. NAFLD or NASH is more likely if: There are also some less common reasons why you may get NAFLD or NASH. They include:  Because most people don’t have symptoms, these conditions aren’t easy to diagnose. Your doctor may use different methods to find out if you have fatty liver disease. Some of the things your doctor may use to diagnose fatty liver disease are: There are no medications approved for NAFLD, though some are inclinical trials. Usually the first line of treatment is tolose weight. It helps reduce fat, inflammation, and scarring in your liver. Losing just 3% to 5% of your body weight can cut down on how much fat is in your liver.Weight loss surgeryis also an option if you have a lot to lose. You’ll also need to quit drinking. It’s the only way you can keep liver damage from getting worse. You may even be able to undo some of the liver damage that’s already happened. Talk to your doctor about how you can get help. You may need a medically supervised detox program to safely quit drinking and manage withdrawal symptoms. If you have complications due to NASH, such as cirrhosis or liver failure, you may need to have aliver transplant. In general, people with NASH who get a liver transplant do very well. Lifestyle changes can help:  The main complication for all these conditions is cirrhosis, or scarring of your liver. As your liver tries to stop the inflammation that comes with these conditions, it creates areas of scars. As inflammation spreads, so do the scars, and eventually, your liver can’t do its job. That can result in:  To prevent ALD: For NAFLD and NASH, It boils down to making better choices:  SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Definition & Facts of NAFLD & NASH,” “Cirrhosis,” “Symptoms & causes of NAFLD & NASH,” “Diagnosis of NAFLD & NASH,” “Treatment for NAFLD & NASH,” American Liver Foundation: “Alcohol-Related Liver Disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease,” “Alcoholic hepatitis.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: Diagnosis and Management.” Cleveland Clinic: “Ascites.” Clinical Trials.gov: “A Study of Pemafibrate in Patients With Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD),” “Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) Pharmacological Treatment: Metformin Versus Atorvastatin,” “Treatment for Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver With Different Doses of Vitamin E.” UpToDate: “Epidemiology, clinical features, and diagnosis of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in adults.” News release, Mayo Clinic. University of Michigan Medicine: “Alcoholic Liver Disease.” Current Opinion in Gastroenterology: “Aging and liver disease.” Types, symptoms and treatments. Myths and facts about this essential organ. Your face, eyes & hands can show it. What causes it? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.