Fetal alcohol syndrome is the most severefetal alcohol spectrum disorder. These are a group ofbirth defectsthat can happen when apregnantwoman drinks alcohol.Other fetal alcohol syndrome disorders (FASDs) include: FAS and other spectrum disorders affect children differently. Symptoms can range from mild to severe. They can include: The symptoms offetal alcohol syndrometend to get worse as a person grows up. Alcohol -- including wine, beer, and liquor -- is the leading preventable cause of birth defects in the U.S. In the womb, a baby doesn't have a fully developedliverthat can process or break down alcohol, so it can easily get to and damage the baby's organs. That can cause: Some of the most severe problems happen when a pregnant woman drinks in thefirst trimester, when the baby'sbrainstarts to develop. But the second and third trimesters aren’t safe either. Thebrainis still developing then, and this process can be interrupted by even moderate amounts of alcohol. There is no "safe" amount of alcohol that pregnant women can drink. And there is no time during pregnancy when it’s considered safe to drink alcohol, either. Fetal alcohol syndrome can have many symptoms, including: Physical defects: Neurological problems: Behavioral issues: There is no lab test that can prove a child hasfetal alcohol syndrome. Many of its symptoms can seem likeADHD. To diagnosefetal alcohol syndrome, doctors look for unusual facial features, lower-than-average height andweight, small head size, problems with attention and hyperactivity, and poor coordination. They also try to find out whether the mother drank while they were pregnant and if so, how much. The symptoms offetal alcohol syndromecan't be cured, but early diagnosis and treatment can improve a child’s development and outlook. Research shows that children do better when they: Therapy can help with behavior and educational problems. Parents can also get training to help their child. There are no medications to treatfetal alcohol syndromespecifically. But certain medicines can help with symptoms like hyperactivity, inability to focus, oranxiety. These medications include: A child with fetal alcohol syndrome needs to be watched closely to see if their treatment needs to be adjusted. Complementary therapies may bring some benefits. They  include: Treatment to help a mother with alcohol addiction is also recommended. Not only can this prevent fetal alcohol syndrome disorders in future children, it can also provide the mother with parenting skills to help their child with fetal alcohol syndrome. Fetal alcohol syndrome can result in behavioral problems later in life. These include: SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: “Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders,” “Health Issues of Premature Babies.” CDC: "Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorders,” “FASDs: Treatments,” “Alcohol use in pregnancy,” “Alcohol and pregnancy questions and answers.” KidsHealth.org: " Fetal Alcohol Syndrome." Mayo Clinic: “Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Symptoms & Causes,” “Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Diagnosis & Treatment.” National Organization on Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (NOFAS): "Key Facts on Alcohol and Pregnancy." March of Dimes: “Alcohol during pregnancy.” American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Tobacco, alcohol, drugs and pregnancy.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.