You can help protect someone during aseizureby being prepared to take simple steps. But you can help protect someone from harm during one. Someseizuresare more dangerous than others, but most aren't an emergency. If you want to do something for the person, focus on keeping them safe. The type of seizure most people will think of is the generalized tonic-clonic seizure, better known as a grand mal seizure. They're frightening to watch, and someone who has one rarely knows or remembers what's happening. These seizures follow a pattern: Any generalized seizure can be dangerous because the person is unaware of their surroundings and can't protect themselves from harm. The uncontrolled thrashing raises their chances of getting hurt. Focal seizures are different. They're less intense and usually last no more than a minute or two. Part of their body, like an arm, might get stiff or go floppy. You may see repeated, rhythmic, or jerking movements in one place or that spread to different body parts. The person could zone out or stare at nothing. They may or may not realize what's happening but can't control it. When it's over, they won't remember a thing. It's all about taking precautions. For someone having a generalized tonic-clonic seizure: Don'tput anything in theirmouth. Contrary to popular myth, you can't swallow yourtongueduring a seizure. But putting something in theirmouthcould damage theirteeth, or they might bite you. If their head isn't moving, turn it to one side. Look at your watch at the start of the seizure, so you can time its length. Remember, this probably isn't an emergency, although it may look like one. After the jerking stops, gently place them on their side, to help keep their airway clear. For milder seizures, like a bit of staring or shaking arms or legs, guide the person away from hazards, including traffic, stairs, and water. Don't leave someone who's had a seizure alone. Stay until they're fully aware of where they are and can respond normally when you talk to them. Speak calmly. Reassure them and explain what they missed if they're confused or frightened. Don't give them anything to drink or eat until they've completely recovered. There are medicines and treatments which can and should be used in specific situations. Referred to as “rescue medications,” they do not take the place of daily medications and should only be used to help stop a seizure quickly in emergency situations. Depending on the circumstance, they can be administered: The most commonly used medications are benzodiazepines because they get into the bloodstream quickly to start working on the brain to stop the seizure. They include: Get medical help when: If you're concerned that something else may be wrong, or the person has another medical condition such asheart diseaseordiabetes, call a doctor. SOURCES: Epilepsy Foundation: "Living With Epilepsy," "Focal Onset Aware Seizures (simple partial seizures)," "First Aid," "Is an Emergency Room Visit Needed?" Epilepsy Action: "First aid," "Focal seizures." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Seizures and Epilepsy: Hope Through Research." Causes, symptoms, and treatments. How is each one different? CBD, a plant chemical, may cut down seizures. Which medication is right for you? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.