If you have fissures in yourtongue, it's likely no cause for concern. In fact, certain types of grooves or cracks are considered simply a variation of a normaltongue. Sometimes called a plicated orscrotal tongue, this condition is often harmless. However, it's rarely a good idea to diagnose yourself. So, if you have any concerns, set your mind at ease by discussing this with your doctor or oral specialist. These are the characteristics of a fissured tongue: Unless debris builds up in these fissures, you are unlikely to have any symptoms. Fissures may first appear during childhood. However, fissures are more common in adults. And, just aswrinklescan deepen with age, fissures can also become more pronounced as you get older. If you have regular dental exams, your dentist has no doubt spotted the fissures on your tongue. This is how most fissures are found. About 2% to 5% of the U.S. population has a fissured tongue. A fissured tongue may affect men slightly more often than women. Because a fissured tongue can cluster in families, it may be genetically inherited. Although other causes of fissured tongue are unknown, it may appear along with other conditions such as these: It is not common to need abiopsyof a fissured tongue. If a fissured tongue causes any symptoms, your dentist may encourage you to brush your tongue. This may help remove debris that has built up in deep fissures, causing irritation. In almost all cases, though, no treatment is needed. However, if you have symptoms or any complications of Melkersson-Rosenthal syndrome, your dentist or doctor may recommend that you see a specialist. SOURCES: eMedicine: "Fissured Tongue." NetWellness Consumer Health Information: "Common Mouth and Tongue Conditions." Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.