Anemiais a condition that happens when you don’t have enough redblood cellsto carry oxygen to your body’s tissues. One reason could be that you don’t have enough hemoglobin to make redblood cells. That’s aproteinin red blood cells that helps carry oxygen throughout the body. You can also become anemic by not getting enough folate (vitamin B9), the natural form offolic acidfound in foods. You can getfolic acid deficiency anemiaa few different ways. Here are some examples: You don’t eat enough foods that contain folic acid.This is the case for most people. You might not be eating enough foods like leafy green vegetables, beans, citrus fruits, orwhole grains. You drink a lot ofalcohol.Over time, this makes it harder for yourintestinesto absorb folate. You havestomach problems.When your small intestine isn’t working the way it should, your body has a hard time hanging on to as much folate as it needs. For instance, people withceliac diseaseare at risk for this type ofanemia. People withcancerare, as well. You’repregnant.A growingbabyabsorbs lots of folic acid from its mother. Amedicationyou’re taking is keeping your body from absorbing folate.This is the case with many medicines, such as phenytoin (Dilantin),methotrexate,sulfasalazine,triamterene,pyrimethamine,trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, andbarbiturates. You were born with it.Problems absorbing enough folic acid can run in families. Infants with this problem need treatment right away to avoid long-term problems. Any kind of anemia can cause problems like: If your anemia is caused by not having enough folate in your body, you could also notice the following: To check forfolate deficiency anemia, your doctor will ask you about your symptoms. They might also order blood tests and a complete blood count (CBC) test to measure the number and appearance of your red blood cells. If you have a lack of folate, your red blood cells look large and immature. Folate deficiency anemia is prevented and treated by eating a healthy diet. This includes foods rich in folic acid, such as nuts, leafy green vegetables, enriched breads and cereals, and fruit. Your doctor will also likely prescribe you a daily folic acid supplement. If your folate levels return to normal, you may be able to stop taking it. But some people need a supplement for life. Most cases of this type of anemia are easily treated. Severe effects are rare. But if you’ve been without folate for a long time, your risk of having some types ofcancerandheart diseasegoes up. You might also find it harder toget pregnant. Yourfertilitywill likely return to normal once you’re getting enough folate again. If you are pregnant and don’t get enough folate, you are at higher risk of aplacental abruption. This happens when the placenta pulls away from the uterus wall and disrupts blood flow to yourfetus. It cancause painand increased bleeding. Yourfetuscould die. Your unborn child can also be harmed by too little folate. They may have a low birthweightor be born before theirdue date. They are also more likely to have spina bifida, a disease that causes damage to the spinal cord and nerves. As soon as you notice any symptoms. If left untreated, some of these could get worse and your anemia could cause lasting damage. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Low Hemoglobin Count,” “Vitamin Deficiency Anemia.” NHS: “Vitamin B12 or Folate Deficiency Anaemia,” “Vitamin B12 or folate deficiency anaemia -- Symptoms,” Vitamin B12 or Folate Deficiency Anaemia -- Complications.” University of Rochester Medical Center: “Folate-Deficiency Anemia.” The Journal of Nutrition:“Metabolic interactions of alcohol and folate.” European Review of Medical and Pharmacological Sciences:“Folate in gastrointestinal health and disease.” Drugs:“Drugs and Folate Metabolism.” Novant Health/Matthews Medical Center: “Anemia of Folate Deficiency.” CDC: “Spina Bifida.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.