If you’re recovering from astroke, it’s important to eat well to nourish your body. It gives you the energy you need to stay active, do rehabilitativetherapy, and get back to your daily activities. It also can make it less likely that you will have anotherstroke. But eating may not be as simple as it was before yourstroke.Brain damagecan make it harder to move your muscles, make you more sensitive topain, and affect your appetite andmoods. Here are some ways a stroke can affect normal eating, and what you can do: Trouble swallowing.You may choke,cough, or gag while you eat. Or find that liquid comes out of your nose when you try to swallow. It usually gets better over time, but a few tips can help: Problems using utensils.A stroke can make the muscles in your arms or hands weaker, which makes it hard to use forks, knives, and spoons. Try: Loss of appetite.You may not feel as hungry as you usually do. If you’re depressed, you may not feel like eating. Or the stroke could have damaged the part of yourbrainthat controls your senses, which can affect yoursense of tasteor smell. To work up a stronger appetite, try to: Don’t ignore yourmental health.Depressionis common after a stroke. It can make you feel sad and anxious, steal your appetite, and give youtrouble sleeping. Your doctor can prescribe anantidepressant, or you can see a therapist or counselor fortalk therapy. No energy.You may feeltoo tiredto get out of bed, let alone make it to the grocery store and fix a full meal. You can makehealthy eatingeasier with a few savvy steps: SOURCES: National Stroke Association: “Recovery After Stroke: Healthy Eating,” “Dysphagia.” UPMC: “Thickened Liquids: Nectar Thick.” American Stroke Association: “Nutrition Tips for Stroke Survivors,” “Nourishing Good Eating Habits.” Stroke Foundation: “Coping with Hemiplegia and Hemiparesis.” Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation:“Altered Taste and Stroke: A Case Report and Literature Review.” National Stroke Association: “Depression.” National Institutes of Health: “Post-Stroke Rehabilitation,” “Relearning the Basics: Rehabilitation After a Stroke.” Know these 5 signs. Things you can do to reduce your chances of having one. Is there a link? Get the facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.