Afood allergyhappens when your immune system responds defensively to a specific food protein that, in reality, is not harmful to the body. The first time you eat the offending food, the immune system responds by creating specific disease-fighting antibodies (called immunoglobulin E or IgE). When you eat the food again, the IgE antibodies spring into action, releasing large amounts ofhistaminein an effort to expel the "foreign invader" from the body. Histamine is a powerful chemical that can affect therespiratory system, gastrointestinal tract,skin, or cardiovascular system. Symptoms of afood allergymay appear almost immediately, or up to two hours after you've eaten the food. Symptoms caninclude: Severe reactions -- calledanaphylaxis-- can be deadly. There are eight foods that cause over 90% offood allergiesin children -- cow's milk, eggs, peanuts, wheat, soy, fish, shellfish, and tree nuts (such as walnuts, pecans, and almonds). In adults, 90% offood allergiesare caused by peanuts, tree nuts, fish, and shellfish. Your doctor may do a radioallergosorbentbloodtest (RAST) to check the number of antibodies produced by your immune system. Elevated levels of certain types of antibodies can help your doctor identify specific food allergies. The doctor may also perform anallergyskin test, also called a scratch test, to identify the substances that are causing yourallergy symptoms. By having you keep  afood diary, your doctor will have a much better starting point to determine the foods that could trigger yourallergies. You may be asked to eliminate all potentially allergenic foods and then add them back to your diet one at a time to see if they prompt any reaction. This is called anelimination and challenge diet. The best way to cope with a food allergy is to strictly avoid the foods that cause a reaction. Mild reactions often will go away  without treatment. Forrashes,antihistaminesmay help reduceitchingand may also relieve congestion and other symptoms. For more serious reactions, corticosteroids, such asprednisone, will help to reduce swelling. In life-threatening situations, anepinephrineinjection can immediately begin to reverse symptoms and is the only effective treatment option. If a doctor has prescribed an auto-injector for you, carry two at all times. Once you and your doctor have determined which foods you should avoid, stay away from them. However, it's important to maintain a healthy, nutritious diet. Ask your doctor to recommend foods that will provide the necessarynutrients. You should also be aware of the ingredients in processed foods. Be sure to read labels. A registered dietitian can help you learn how to read food labels to discover hidden sources of food allergens. Some lotions,haircare products, soaps, andmedicationscan also have food products -- like nuts or milk -- that might trigger allergies. When eating out, call ahead to find out if the staff is trained to deal with food allergies. Be clear with your server about what you need and ask to speak with the manager or chef if you don’t get a good feeling. Order simply-prepared dishes and avoid salad bars or buffets. If you’re prone to allergic reactions, ask your doctor to prescribe an epinephrine injection kit and carry two with you at all times. Let family members and co-workers know what you’re allergic to and how to help if you have a reaction.  If your child is allergic, make an emergency plan with their school and teachers. It can be tricky if you live in a family or roommate situation where one person has an allergy and the others continue to eat the problem food. Here are some tips: SOURCES: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Food Allergy & Anaphylaxis Network: "Food Allergy Facts and Statistics for the U.S.," "How to Read a Label,"  "Tips for Dining Out with Food Allergies," "Understanding Food Labels," "Food Allergen Labeling and Consumer Protection Act," "Food Allergy Action Plan." Food Allergy Initiative: "Living with Food Allergies: at Home." Kids with Food Allergies Foundation: "8 tips for avoiding cross contamination." KidsHealth: "Food Allergies." Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America New England Chapter: "Dining Out." Consortium of Food Allergy Research: "Restaurants and Food Allergy." News conference, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Dec. 3, 2010. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology. Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.