Frostbiteoccurs when tissues freeze. This condition happens when you are exposed to temperatures below the freezing point ofskin. The condition has long been recognized. A 5,000-year-old pre-Columbian mummy discovered in the Chilean mountains offers the earliest documented evidence offrostbite. More recently, Napoleon’s chief surgeon, Baron Dominique Larrey, provided the first description of the mechanisms of frostbite in 1812, during his army’s retreat from Moscow. He also noted the harmful effects of the freeze-thaw-freeze cycle endured by soldiers who would warm their frozen hands and feet over the campfire at night only to refreeze those same parts by the next morning. Although frostbite used to be a military problem, it is now a civilian one as well. Most people who get frostbite are males ages 30 to 49. The nose, cheeks, ears, fingers, and toes (your extremities) are most commonly affected. Everyone is susceptible, even people who have been living in cold climates for most of their lives. Your body works to stay alive first and to stay functioning second. A variety of frostbite classification systems have been proposed. The easiest to understand, and perhaps the one that gives the best clues to outcome, divides frostbite into 2 main divisions: superficial and deep. A doctor must be able to see and examine the affected area. A simple telephone call is probably not sufficient in all but the mildest cases of cold injury to hands and feet. You need to see a doctor for care. At the time of initial evaluation, it is very difficult to categorize the injury as superficial or deep, and even more difficult to ascertain the amount of tissue damage. Therefore, all people should be seen by a doctor, who will supervise the rewarming process, attempt to classify the injury, and further guide the treatment process. Someone with frostbite will need evaluation for, and possible treatment of, hypothermia anddehydration. The doctor will take a history in order to gather information on the events of the exposure and the medical condition prior to the cold injury. Symptoms follow a predictable pathway. Numbness initially is followed by a throbbing sensation that begins with rewarming and may last weeks to months. This is then typically replaced by a lingering feeling of tingling with occasional electric-shock sensations. Cold sensitivity, sensory loss,chronic pain, and a variety of other symptoms may last for years. The treatment of frostbite is done over a period of weeks to months. Definitive therapy, possibly in the form of surgery, may not be performed for up to 6 months after the initial injury. Therefore, establish a working relationship between you and your doctor that will continue throughout the healing process. The first step in preventing frostbite is knowing whether you are at increased risk for the injury. Although people don't always know or acknowledge these dangers, many of the dangers can be reduced or prevented. People with diabetes and anyone with vessel disease should take extra precautions, as should the very young, very old, and unconditioned. Be especially wary of wet and windy conditions. The "feels like" temperature (windchill) is actually much lower than the stated air temperature. A common saying among surgeons who have treated people with frostbite is "frostbite in January,amputatein July." It often takes months before the final separation between healthy and dead tissue may be determined. If surgery is performed too early, the risks of removing tissue that may eventually recover or leaving behind tissue that may eventually die are great. Some radiographic techniques currently are being investigated that may be able to make this division much sooner, thus permitting earlier definitive treatment. In some cases, bone scans are used to help predict the viability of tissue. Beyond this waiting period, 65% of people will suffer long-term symptoms because of their frostbite. Common symptoms include pain or abnormal sensations in the extremity, heat or cold sensitivity, excessivesweating, and arthritis. frostbite, frostnip (often used to refer to the precursor of frostbite), trench foot, chilblains, pernio, dead skin, dead tissue, cold weather, extremities SOURCE: Frostbite from eMedicineHealth Why do some people bruise more easily? 8 essentials for car or purse. 4 steps for adults. Learn when to call a doctor. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.