A fungal nail infection is a common condition that can leave you with brittle, discolored nails, usually on your toes. Its formal name is onychomycosis, and it’s a lot like athlete’s foot. But instead of affecting the skin on the bottom of yourfeetor between your toes, it invades your nails. Fungi are tiny organisms you can only see through a microscope. Many different types can cause a nail infection. Sometimes they live on yourskinand don’t make any trouble. But if you have a lot in one area, you might get infected. Don’t be embarrassed if you have toenail orfingernail fungus. It’s way more common than you think. There are 4 main kinds of fungal nail infection. Each looks slightly different: Symptoms are different, depending on which type of fungal nail infection you have. They usually start mild and get more serious. It’s easy to ignore fungal nail infections at first, since you may not have anypain. But if you don’t treat them, it can hurt to put any pressure on the area. If an infection gets bad enough, it could even become hard to walk. You get an infection when a crack in your nail or the skin around it allows fungus to get inside and grow. Sincefungusthrives in dark, warm places, your toenails are more likely to be affected than your fingernails. Your toes also have lessbloodflow than your fingers, which makes it harder for your body to pick up on and prevent an infection. You’re more likely to get a fungal nail infection if you: See your doctor if you think you have nail fungus. You may need a prescription to treat it, whether that means taking a medicine by mouth or using a special cream. In serious cases, your nail may need to be removed so a healthy new one can grow in its place. Doctors can also use lasers to treat nail fungus.  See your doctor if you think you have nail fungus. It can be tough to get rid of, and you’re more likely to have success with a prescription. Treatments include: To prevent an infection,wash your handsand feet often. Use soap, and make sure you get between your fingers and toes. Also:   It can take a year or more for your nails to look like they did before the infection. And you may continue to have problems: It’s especially important to take care of a fungal nail infection if you have diabetes. You’re at greater risk of getting a serious skin infection. SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians: “Nail Fungal Infections.” American Family Physician:“Onychomycosis: Current Trends in Diagnosis and Treatment,” “Treating Onychomycosis.” National Health Service (U.K.): “Fungal Nail Infection.” Mayo Clinic: “Nail Fungus.” Cleveland Clinic: “How You Can Stop Foot and Toenail Fungus In Its Tracks.” American Podiatric Medical Association: “Toenail Fungus.” CDC: “Fungal Nail Infections.” Medscape: “Onychomycosis.” American Academy of Dermatology Association: “Nail Fungus.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.