Gallstones are pieces of solid material that form in yourgallbladder, a small organ under your liver. If you have them, you might hear your doctor say you have cholelithiasis. Your gallbladder stores and releases bile, a fluid made in your liver, to help in digestion. Bile also carries wastes like cholesterol and bilirubin, which your body makes when it breaks down red blood cells. These things can form gallstones. Gallstones can range in size from a grain of sand to a golf ball. You might not know that you have them until they block a bile duct, causing pain that needs treatment right away. The two main kinds of gallstones are:   Gallstones don't normally cause symptoms. Symptoms occur only when a gallstone gets stuck and blocks the flow of bile through your system. If you have symptoms, they may include: See your doctor or go to the hospital if you have signs of a serious infection or inflammation: Doctors aren’t sure exactly what causes gallstones, but they might happen when: You're more likely to get gallstones if you: Your doctor will do a physical exam and might order tests including: Blood tests.These check for signs of infection or blockage, and rule out other conditions. Ultrasound.This makes images of the inside of your body. CT scan.Specialized X-rays let your doctor see inside your body, including your gallbladder. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP).This test uses a magnetic field and pulses of radio waves to make pictures of the inside of your body, including your liver and gallbladder. Cholescintigraphy (HIDA scan).This test can check whether your gallbladder squeezes correctly. Your doctor injects a harmless radioactive material that makes its way to the organ. A technician can then watch its movement. This can help diagnosecholecystitis(inflammation of the gallbladder) from gallstones. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).Your doctor runs a tube called an endoscope through your mouth down to your small intestine. They inject a dye so they can see your bile ducts on a camera in the endoscope. They can often take out any gallstones that have moved into the ducts, but that’s only done if treatment is planned as part of the procedure since it’s invasive. Endoscopic ultrasound.This test combines ultrasound and endoscopy to look for gallstones that may be in places that are hard to see with other imaging, such as in the common bile duct as it passes through the pancreas. If your gallstones aren’t causing symptoms, there’s usually no need for you to have surgery. You’ll only need it if a stone goes into, or blocks, one of your bile ducts. This causes what doctors call a “gallbladder attack.” It’s an intense, knife-like pain in your belly that can last several hours. If you have sickle cell or another blood disorder, your doctor may consider doing a cholecystectomy as a precaution, even if you don't have symptoms. You don’t need treatment if you don’t have symptoms. Some small gallstones can pass through your body on their own. Most people with gallstones have their gallbladders taken out. You can still digest food without it. Your doctor will use one of two procedures. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy.This is the most common surgery for gallstones. The surgeon works through tiny cuts (incisions). They pass a narrow tube called a laparoscope into your belly through a small cut. The tube contains a tiny light and a camera. The doctor will take out your gallbladder through another small cut using special devices. You’ll usually go home the same day. Open cholecystectomy.Your doctor makes bigger cuts in your belly to remove your gallbladder. You’ll stay in the hospital for a few days afterward. You’ll need open surgery if you have a bleeding disorder. You may also need it if you have severe gallbladder disease, are very overweight, or are in your last trimester of pregnancy. For both types of surgery,  you’ll get general anesthesia. This means you won’t be awake during the procedure. If gallstones are in your bile ducts, your doctor may use ERCP to find and remove them before or during surgery. Nonsurgical treatment:If you have another medical condition and your doctor thinks you shouldn't have surgery, they might give you medication instead. Chenodiol (Chenodol) and ursodiol (Actigall, Urso 250, Urso Forte) dissolve cholesterol stones. They can cause mild diarrhea. You may have to take the medicine for years to totally dissolve the stones, and they may come back after you stop taking it. Gallstones can cause serious problems, including: Some lifestyle changes might lower your risk of gallstones. SOURCES: National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse. American College of Surgeons. UpToDate: “Patient education: Gallstones (Beyond the Basics).” Mayo Clinic: “Gallstones.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Gallstones.” Harvard Health Publishing: “Gallstones: Symptoms, diagnosis and treatment.” Cleveland Clinic: “Gallstones.” Merck Manual Consumer Version:“Gallstones.” NHS inform: “Gallstones.” University of California San Francisco Medical Center: “Gallstones.” Society of American Gastrointestinal and Endoscopic Surgeons: “Laparoscopic Gallbladder Removal (Cholecystectomy) Patient Information from SAGES.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Dieting and Gallstones.” Harvard Health Publications: “What to Do About Gallstones?” NHS Choices: “Gallstone Treatment,” “Gallbladder Removal -- Complications,” “Gallbladder Removal -- What Happens.” Mayo Clinic: “Cholecystectomy (Gallbladder Removal),” “Endoscopic Ultrasound.” Better Health Channel/State Government of Victoria, Australia: “Gallbladder: Gallstones and Surgery.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.