Aganglion cystis a small sac of fluid that forms over a joint or tendon (tissue that connects muscle to bone). Inside the cyst is a thick, sticky, clear, colorless, jellylike material. Depending on the size, cysts may feel firm or spongy. Ganglion cysts, also known as bible cysts, most commonly show up on the back of the hand at the wrist joint but they can also develop on the palm side of the wrist. They can also show up in other areas, but these are less common: Symptoms of a ganglion cyst can include: The below image shows a traumatic ganglion cyst. This person came to the emergency department with a painful bump after the wrist was hit by a car door.   The image below shows the jellylike fluid taken from the cyst in the above image. Its presence confirms the diagnosis of a ganglion cyst.   An ultrasound image below shows the ganglion cyst (area between markers).   The below image shows a ganglion cyst that has been operated on in the past. This ganglion returned because this person plays the cymbals in their school band.   The cause of ganglion cysts is not known. One theory suggests that trauma causes the tissue of the joint to break down, forming small cysts that then join into a larger, more obvious mass. The most likely theory involves a flaw in the joint capsule or tendon sheath that allows the joint tissue to bulge out. Ganglion cysts are more common in women, and 70% occur in people between the ages of 20-40. Rarely, ganglion cysts can occur in children younger than 10 years. If you have a bump, you should see your doctor, even if you don’t have symptoms that bother you. Aphysical examis often all that is needed to diagnose a ganglion cyst. A ganglion cyst doesn’t need emergency treatment unless you have significant trauma. A routine check by either your doctor or a specialist in bones and joints (an orthopedist) is often enough. Self-care at home If your cyst isn’t bothering you, your doctor may tell you to keep an eye on it and be in touch if anything changes. Many cysts can disappear without any treatment at all. In the past, home care for these growths included topical plaster, heat, and various poultices. It even extended to use of a heavy book to physically smash the cyst. These forms of treatment are no longer suggested, because they have not been shown to keep the ganglion cysts from returning and could, in fact, cause further injury. Medical treatment If your cyst is bothering you, your doctor may recommend one of these treatments: After you have been diagnosed with a ganglion cyst and have chosen to have treatment, follow-up will be different based on what you have chosen to do. Because the cause of a ganglion cyst is not known, it is difficult to tell how to prevent them. Early evaluation and treatment are recommended. Because this is a tumor that can go away on its own, or after a simple needle aspiration or minor surgery, chances are good that you will have a full recovery. Because ganglion cysts may come back after any of these treatments, however, a single treatment may not be enough.  SOURCES:eMedicineHealth: “Ganglion Cyst” Mayo Clinic: “Ganglion Cyst.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Ganglion Cyst.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.