When you havediarrheaandvomiting, you may say you have the "stomach flu." These symptoms often are due to a condition calledgastroenteritis. With gastroenteritis, yourstomachandintestinesare irritated and inflamed. The cause is typically a viral orbacterial infection. With gastroenteritis, the main symptoms you probably have are waterydiarrheaandvomiting. You might also havestomach pain, cramping, fever, nausea, and aheadache. Because of diarrhea and vomiting, you also can become dehydrated. Watch forsigns of dehydration, such asdry skinand adry mouth, feeling lightheaded, and being really thirsty. Call your doctor if you have any of these symptoms. Children can get dehydrated quickly, so if your child has the stomach flu, it's important that you look for signs that they are very thirsty or hasdry skinor adry mouth. If you have a baby, look for fewer, drier diapers. Keep children with gastroenteritis out ofday careor school until all symptoms are gone. Check with your doctor before giving your child any medicine. Drugs used to control diarrhea and vomiting aren't usually given to children younger than 5. To help prevent rotavirus -- the most common cause of stomach flu for children -- there are two vaccines that can be given to infants. Talk to your doctor about thevaccines. There are many ways gastroenteritis can be spread: The most common cause of gastroenteritis is a virus. The main types arerotavirusandnorovirus. Rotavirus is the world's most common cause of diarrhea in infants and young children. Norovirus is the most common cause of serious gastroenteritis and also foodborne disease outbreaks in the U.S. Although not as common, bacteria such as E. coli and salmonella can also trigger the stomach flu.Salmonellaand campylobacter bacteria are the most common bacterial causes of gastroenteritis in the U.S. and are usually spread by undercooked poultry, eggs, or poultry juices. Salmonella can also be spread through pet reptiles or live poultry. Another bacteria, shigella, is often passed around in day care centers. It typically is spread from person to person, and common sources of infection are contaminated food and drinking water. Parasites can also cause gastroenteritis, but it's not common. You can pick up organisms such as giardia and cryptosporidium in contaminatedswimmingpools or by drinking contaminated water. There are also other unusual ways to get gastroenteritis: Prevent dehydration: As symptoms start to ease: When to call a doctor Call 911 if the person is in shock fromsevere dehydration(faints, can't walk, is confused, or is having trouble breathing) Seek medical help if: Dehydrationwith these symptoms should be treated in an emergency room: SOURCES: CDC: "Norovirus -- Overview," "Rotavirus -- Prevention," "Rotavirus," "Viral Gastroenteritis." Cleveland Clinic: "Gastroenteritis." KidsHealth: "Stomach Flu." Medscape: "Emergent Treatment of Gastroenteritis." The Merck Manual Home Health Handbook: "Overview of Gastroenteritis." National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse: "Viral Gastroenteritis." PeaceHealth: "Gastroenteritis in Adults and Older Children." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Treating Gastroenteritis and Dehydration in Your Child." Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.