Geographic tongue is a condition that gets its name from patches that look like a map on the top and sides of yourtongue. You can also have it in other areas of your mouth. Doctors sometimes call itbenign migratory glossitis. The patches can come and go or change very quickly over days, weeks, or months. You might have them for up to a year. Geographic tongue is benign, which means it’s harmless. It isn't linked to an infection orcancer. It isn’t contagious, so you can’t catch it from or pass it to someone else. The signs of geographictongueare uneven red patches. They’re usually on your tongue but can also be on your gums, on your cheeks, on the roof of your mouth, or under your tongue. These patches may: You may not know that you have geographic tongue until your dentist or doctor spots it during an oral exam. About 1 in 10 people with geographic tongue have mild discomfort or a burning or painful feeling. This is often because of things like: Geographic tongue happens when parts of your tongue are missing layers of papillae. Doctors aren’t sure exactly why you lose them. However, because geographic tongue tends to run in families, it might have something to do with your genes. Geographic tongue is also more common in people who havepsoriasisor cracks and grooves on the top and sides of their tongue (fissured tongue). Geographic tongue affects about 1% to 3% of people. It can happen at any age, but it’s more likely in young adults. It’s more common in women than in men. Your dentist or doctor will ask about your symptoms and look at yourmouthand tongue. You may need tests to rule out other medical conditions. Any pain or discomfort will probably get better on its own. But if you have severe, constant pain,medicationcan help. Your doctor or dentist may prescribe: It might also help to limit or avoid things like: Photo Credit: Pierphotographer / Getty Images SOURCES: NetWellness Consumer Health Information:"Common Mouth and Tongue Conditions." OhioHealth online: "Geographic tongue." American Academy of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology: "Geographic Tongue." American Academy of Oral Medicine: “Geographic Tongue.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Geographic Tongue.” American Academy of Oral Medicine – Photo Caption Cleveland Clinic – Photo Caption Mayo Clinic – Photo Caption National Organization for Rare Diseases – Photo Caption Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.