If you just found out that you or your child has a germ cell tumor, you may have a lot of questions about what it means and what comes next. There are many kinds of germ cell tumors, and only some of them arecancer. Germ cells don’t have anything to do with germs. They get their name from the word “germinate,” which means to begin to grow. That’s because as a baby develops before birth, germ cells move into place and become either eggs in the ovaries orspermin the testicles. Sometimes, a group of germ cells grows in a way that’s not normal. A tumor forms. This usually happens in an ovary or testicle. You can also get a germ cell tumor in yourbrain, chest, belly, pelvis, or lower back, but it’s not as common. Changes in the genes of a germ cell can cause it to grow out of control, which leads to a tumor. Doctors aren’t sure what triggers that change. Still, you may be more likely to get a germ cell tumor if you have: Anyone can get an ovarian germ cell tumor. But those who are 30 oryounger are more likely to develop it. Things that raise your risk of developing testicular germ cell tumors include:  There are several, but five are more common than others: Extragonadal germ cells are tumor cells that form in body parts outside of the ovaries or testicles. These are rare. Types of extragonadal germ cell tumors include: It depends on the type of tumor and where it’s located. Common signs of germ cell tumors include: They’ll start by asking questions about your health and symptoms, and then do aphysical exam. After that, you may get: It depends on the kind of tumor you have, where it is, and if it has spread.Germ cell tumors can spread to other parts of your body such as lymph nodes, the lungs, liver, or brain. Your doctor will also take your age and overall health into account. You may need more than one type of treatment. Your doctor will help you figure out the best approach. Treatment options usually include: The 5-year survival rate looks at your or your child’s likelihood of surviving 5 years after the cancer was first found. For children under 15 with germ cell tumors, the outlook is good, and the 5-year survival rate is high at 90%. For those between the ages of 15-19, the 5-year survival rate is 93%. After you or your child complete treatments, it’s possible for the tumor to come back. This is called a relapse. Talk to your doctor about what to watch out for, and make sure to go to your follow-up appointments.  SOURCES: University of Rochester Medical Center: “Germ Cell Tumors.” Children’s Oncology Group: “Germ Cell Tumors.” The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center: “Childhood Germ Cell Tumors.” KidsHealth: “Germ Cell Tumors.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Germ Cell Tumors.” Cleveland Clinic: “Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors.” Radiopaedia.org: “Risk Factors for Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.” Cancer Research UK: “What Are Germ Cell Tumours?” American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Germ Cell Tumors – Childhood: Statistics.” Fertility and Sterility: "Testicular Dysgenesis Syndrome: Mechanistic Insights and Potential New Downstream Effects." What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.