Gestational diabetes is a condition in which your blood sugar levels become high during pregnancy. It affects up to 10% of women who are pregnant in the U.S. each year. It affects pregnant people who haven’t ever been diagnosed with diabetes. There are two classes of gestational diabetes. Those with class A1 can manage it through diet and exercise. Those who have class A2 need to take insulin or other medications. Gestational diabetes goes away after you give birth. But it can affect your baby’s health, and it raises your risk of getting type 2 diabetes later in life. You can take steps so you and your baby stay healthy.  If you have gestational diabetes, you usually don’t have symptoms or might chalk them up topregnancy. Most find out that they have it during a routine screening.You may notice that: When you eat, your pancreas releases insulin, a hormone that helps move a sugar called glucose from your blood to your cells, which use it for energy. During pregnancy, your placenta makes hormones that cause glucose to build up in your blood. Usually, your pancreas can send out enough insulin to handle it. But if your body can’t make enough insulin or stops using insulin as it should, yourblood sugar levelsrise, and you get gestational diabetes. You’re more likely to get gestational diabetes if you: Gestational diabetes usually happens in the second half of pregnancy. Your doctor will check for it between weeks 24 and 28, or sooner if you're at high risk. Your doctor will give you a glucose tolerance test: You’ll drink 50 grams of glucose in a sweet drink, which will raise your blood sugar. An hour later, you’ll take a blood glucose test to see how your body handled all that sugar. If the results show that your blood sugar is higher than a certain level, you’ll need a 3-hour oral glucose tolerance test. For this test, you’ll take a blood glucose test after you have fasted for at least 8 hours (your doctor’s office will tell you exactly how long to fast for) and then drink a beverage containing 100 grams of glucose. After that, you’ll take a blood glucose test every hour for the next 3 hours. Your doctor can also test you by having you fast for at least 8 hours, take a blood glucose test, drink a drink containing 75 grams of glucose, and then take ablood glucosetest once an hour for the next 2 hours. If you’re at high risk but your test results are normal, your doctor might test you again later in your pregnancy to make sure you still don’t have it. If you have gestational diabetes, you’ll need treatment as soon as possible to keep yourself and your baby healthy during your pregnancy and delivery. Your doctor will ask you to: Your doctor will keep track of your weight and your baby’s development. They might give you insulin or another medicine to keep your blood sugar under control. The American Diabetes Association recommends these targets for pregnant women who test their blood sugar: Take these simple steps to stay well: Eat a healthy, low-sugar diet.Talk to your doctor to be sure you’re getting the nutrition you need. Follow a meal plan made for someone withdiabetes: Exercise throughout your pregnancy.You can exercise when you have gestational diabetes as long as your doctor says it’s OK. Being active is a good way to help manage your blood sugar. Staying fit during pregnancy is also good for your posture and can curb some common problems, like backaches and fatigue. Get the right prenatal care:Your doctor can check to see if you havegestational diabetesand offer advice on food, activity, and weight loss. They can also point you to other health professionals, like nutritionists, that can help.If you have morning sickness, eat small snacks.Nibble on crackers, cereal, or pretzels before you get out of bed. As you go through your day, have small meals often and avoid fatty, fried, and greasy foods. If you take insulin, make sure you've got a plan to deal with low blood sugar.Throwing up can make your glucose level drop. Talk to your doctor if you're not sure what to do. You can lower your risk before you get pregnant by: Your baby will probably be healthy if you and your doctor manage your blood sugar while you have gestational diabetes. Right after you give birth, doctors will check your newborn's blood sugar level. If it’s low, your baby may need to get glucose through an IV until it comes back up to normal. Gestational diabetes raises the chance that your baby will be larger than normal. It's also linked to jaundice, in which the skin looks yellowish.Jaundicegenerally fades quickly with treatment. Although your child will be more likely than other kids to get type 2 diabetes later on, a healthy lifestyle (including a good diet and lots of physical activity) can cut that risk. Because you had gestational diabetes, you have a greater chance of having type 2 diabetes. But it won’t definitely happen, and you can take action to prevent that. Your blood sugar levels will likely return to normal about 6 weeks after childbirth. (Your doctor will check on that.) If it does, you should get follow-up tests at least every 3 years; your doctor may recommend yearly testing. To lower your risk: If you plan to have another baby, keep in mind that you are more likely to get gestational diabetes again. Ask your doctor if there are any lifestyle changes that would help you avoid that. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association: "Gestational Diabetes," “What is Gestational Diabetes?” Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: "Gestational Diabetes: A Guide for Pregnant Women." American College of Nurse Midwives: "Gestational Diabetes." Ohio State University Medical Center. University of San Francisco Medical Center: “Diabetes in Pregnancy.” Mayo Clinic: “Gestational diabetes.” CDC: “Gestational Diabetes and Pregnancy,” “Gestational Diabetes.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Gestational Diabetes.” UpToDate: “Gestational diabetes mellitus: Obstetric issues and management.” Diabetes Care: “Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.” National Diabetes Education Program: “Did You Have Gestational Diabetes When You Were Pregnant? What You Need to Know.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.