Giardiasis, also known as a giardia infection, is an intestinal disease marked bydiarrhea,cramps,nausea, andbloating. A tinyparasitecalledGiardia intestinaliscauses the infection. This bug lives all around the world in places that don’t have clean drinkingwater. It’s a common cause of waterborne illness in the U.S. Symptoms usually start 1-3 weeks after you’re exposed. They’ll probably last for 2-6 weeks. The most common include: When should I call a doctor? If you have any of these symptoms for more than a week, call your doctor to see if you should be tested for giardiasis. It’s possible for a giardia infection to get better on its own, but you may need to have treatment. You usually pick up a giardia infection from the stool of an infected person or animal. Before they’re pooped out, the parasites grow a hard shell called a cyst. It helps them live for months outside of a body, either inwateror on a surface. The infection comes after you come in contact with the parasite or a cyst. You might:  While anyone can catch giardiasis, some people are more likely to come in contact with the parasite:  To find out if you have giardiasis, you’ll need to give your doctor a stool sample. They’ll send it to a lab for testing. For the best results, you may need to give samples for testing for several days. If you do have giardiasis, you’ll need to have your stool checked again to see if the parasites have cleared. Many people get better without treatment. But your doctor may want to treat you withmedication.Metronidazole(Flagyl), nitazoxanide (Alinia), andtinidazole(Tindamax) are among the drugs used to treat giardia infections. Giardiasis can cause problems even after the infection has gone away. These can be especially serious in infants and children.  There isn’t avaccineto prevent it, but there are steps you can take:  SOURCES: Medscape: “Giardiasis: Background.” CDC: “Parasites -- Giardia: General Information,” “Parasites -- Giardia: Treatment.” Mayo Clinic: Dehydration: Overview: Symptoms & causes,” “Giardia infection (giardiasis): Overview: Symptoms & causes,” “Giardia infection (giardiasis): Overview: Diagnosis & treatment.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.