For those with diabetes, aninsulinshot delivers medicine into the subcutaneous tissue -- the tissue between yourskinand muscle. Subcutaneous tissue (also called "sub Q" tissue) is found throughout your body. Please follow these steps when using aninsulinsyringe.Note: these instructions are not for patients using aninsulinpen or a non-needle injection system.   Select a clean, dry work area, and gather the following insulin supplies: Wash hands with soap and warm water and dry them with a clean towel. If you've been prescribed two types of insulin to be taken at once (mixed dose), skip to the instructions in the next section. Your doctor may prescribe two types of insulin to be injected at once fordiabetes. This mixed dose may provide better blood sugar control for some people. Please follow these steps when injecting a mixed dose of insulin: Important:This must be an exact measurement. If you withdraw too much cloudy insulin, the total dosage in the syringe must be discarded. Be careful not to push any of the clear insulin from the syringe into the cloudy insulin. If there are large air bubbles after mixing the insulin in the syringe, discard this dosage and start the procedure again. Do not push the insulin back into the bottle. Because you will be injecting insulin on a regular basis for diabetes, you need to know where to inject it and how to rotate (move) your injection sites. By rotating your injection sites, you will make your injections easier, safer, and more comfortable. If the same injection site is used over and over again, you may develop hardened areas under the skin that keep the insulin from being used properly. Important:Only use the sites on the front of your body for self-injection. Any of the sites may be used if someone else is giving you the injection. Follow these guidelines: Choose an injection site for your insulin shot. Do not inject near joints, the groin area, navel, the middle of the abdomen, or near scars. Clean the injection site (about 2 inches of your skin) in a circular motion with an alcohol wipe or a cotton ball dampened with rubbing alcohol. Leave the alcohol wipe or cotton ball nearby. Using the hand you write with, hold the barrel of the syringe (with the needle end down) like a pen, being careful not to put your finger on the plunger. Do not cap the needle. Drop the entire syringe and needle into your container for used "sharps" equipment. When the container is full, put the lid or cover on it and throw it away with the trash. Do NOT put this container in the recycling bin. Some communities have specific disposal laws. Check with your local health department for specific disposal instructions in your community. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association. International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes: ''Consensus Guidelines 2000.'' See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.