Glaucomais a condition that damages youreye's optic nerve, and it gets worse over time. It's often linked to a buildup of pressure inside youreye. Glaucoma tends to run in families. You usually don’t get it until later in life. The increased pressure in your eye, called intraocular pressure, can damage your optic nerve that sends images to yourbrain. If the damage worsens, glaucoma can cause permanentvision lossor even total blindness within a few years. Most people with glaucoma have no early symptoms or pain. Visit your eye doctor regularly so they can diagnose and treat glaucoma before you have long-term vision loss. If you lose vision, it can’t be brought back, but lowering eye pressure can help you keep the sight you have. Most people with glaucoma who follow their treatment plan and have regulareye examsare able to keep their vision. The fluid inside your eye, called aqueous humor, usually flows out of your eye through a mesh-like channel. If this channel gets blocked or the eye is producing too much fluid, the liquid builds up. Sometimes, experts don’t know what causes this blockage, but it can be inherited, meaning it’s passed from parents to children. Less-common causes of glaucoma include a blunt or chemical injury to your eye, severe eye infection, blockedbloodvessels inside your eye, and inflammatory conditions. It’s rare, but eye surgery to correct another condition can sometimes bring it on. It usually affects botheyes, but it may be worse in one than the other. Glaucoma mostly affects adults older than 40 years, but young adults, children, and even infants can have it. African American people tend to get it more often, when they're younger, and with morevision loss. You’re more likely to get it if you: This usually shows up in newborns or during thebaby’s first few years. Symptoms include: There are two main types: Less common types of glaucoma include: Most people with open-angle glaucoma don’t have symptoms. If symptoms do develop, they are usually late in the disease. That’s why glaucoma is often called the "sneak thief of vision." The main sign is usually loss of side, or peripheral, vision. Symptoms of angle-closure glaucoma usually come on faster and are more obvious. Damage can occur quickly. If you have any of these symptoms, get medical care right away: Acute closed- or narrow-angle glaucoma.People often describe this as “the worsteye painof my life.” Symptoms strike quickly: This type ofglaucomais a medical emergency. See an ophthalmologist (eye doctor) or go to an emergency room immediately. Damage to the optic nerve may begin within a few hours, and if not treated within 6 to 12 hours, it may bring very serious, permanent loss of vision or blindness and even a permanently enlarged (dilated) pupil. Glaucoma tests are painless and don’t take long. Your eye doctor will test your vision. They’ll use drops to widen (dilate) your pupils and examine your eyes. They’ll check your optic nerve for signs of glaucoma. They may take photographs so they can spot changes at your next visit. They’ll do a test called tonometry to check your eye pressure. They may also do a visual field test to see if you've lost peripheral vision. If your doctor suspects glaucoma, they may order special imaging tests of your optic nerve. Tell your doctor if you’ve had refractive surgery such as LASIK. It can affect your eye pressure reading. Higher-than-normal eye pressure doesn’t mean that you have glaucoma. In fact, some people with normal pressure can have it, whereas others with higher levels may not. High pressure without damage to the optic nerve is calledocular hypertension. If you have this, your doctor will want to test your eyes often. Open-angle glaucoma is most often treated with combinations of eye drops, laser trabeculoplasty, and microsurgery. Doctors tend to start with medications, but early laser surgery or microsurgery could work better for some people. Eye drops.These either lower the creation of fluid in your eye or increase its flow out, lowering eye pressure. Side effects can includeallergies, redness, stinging, blurred vision, and irritated eyes. Some glaucoma drugs may affect yourheartandlungs. Because of potentialdrug interactions, be sure to tell your doctor about any other medical problems you have or other medications you take. Also, let them know if it’s hard for you to follow a regimen involving two or three different eye drops or if they have side effects. They may be able to change your treatment. Oral medication.Your doctor might also prescribe oral medication for you, such as a beta-blocker or carbonic anhydrase inhibitor. These drugs can improve drainage or slow the creation of fluid in your eye. Laser surgery.This procedure can slightly increase the flow of fluid from your eye if you have open-angle glaucoma. It can stop fluid blockage if you have angle-closure glaucoma. Procedures include: Microsurgery.In a procedure called a trabeculectomy, your doctor creates a new channel to drain the fluid and ease eye pressure. This form of surgery may need to be done more than once. Your doctor might implant a tube to help drain fluid. This surgery can lead to temporary or permanent vision loss, as well as bleeding or infection. Minimally invasive glaucoma surgeries.This is a newer less invasive form of surgery, which usually requires tiny openings and uses devices you can’t see with the naked eye. It's generally faster and safer but won’t lower pressure by quite as much. The procedure can also be done at the same time as other procedures such as cataract surgery. Open-angle glaucoma is most often treated with combinations of eye drops, laser trabeculoplasty, and microsurgery. Doctors tend to start with medications, but early laser surgery or microsurgery could work better for some people. Acute angle-closure glaucoma is usually treated with a laser procedure. Infantor congenital glaucoma—meaning you’re born with it—is usually treated with surgery because the cause is a problem with your drainage system. Marijuana and Glaucoma Studies in the 1970s reported thatsmokingmarijuanacould lower eye pressure. But it would take far too much to significantly lower eye pressure. It also lowersblood pressurethat could wipe out any gains frommarijuanaby limiting thebloodflow that your optic nerve needs. Reviews by the National Eye Institute and Institute of Medicine show that there is no scientific evidence that marijuana is more effective than modern medications. Glaucoma is a lifelong condition and needs continual follow-up with your eye doctor. There are other things you can do to help keep youreyeshealthy. Get moving. Regularexercisemay help lowereyepressure and keepbloodflowing to the nerves in youreye. Some activities can increase pressure, so talk to your doctor about the best exercise program for you. Eat healthy. Enjoy a healthy, well-rounded diet. It won't keep yourglaucomafrom getting worse, but it's key to keeping your body andeyeshealthy. Some studies suggest that food high inantioxidantscan help when you have glaucoma. Eat more nutrient-rich foods such as: Take your medicine. Be sure to take your drops or pills exactly as directed. Set a reminder on your phone or watch so that you don't forget. Missing your meds could make your glaucoma worse. Careful with contacts.You should be able to continue wearing contact lenses if you use medicated eye drops. But you may need to use some drugs when you don’t have lenses in. Also, some older medications can change your vision prescription. And if you need surgery, it may affect your ability to wear contacts. Don't smoke.It's important to keep your body healthy, and nicotine takes a toll.Smokingalso increasesblood pressureand eyeinflammationthat can increase yourrisk for diabetesandcataracts. Both are risk factors for glaucoma. If you smoke, ask your doctor for advice on how to quit. Watch yourcaffeine. Watch how much soda,coffee, andteayou drink. Too muchcaffeinecan increase your eye pressure. One study found that just a cup ofcoffeecould make the pressure in your eye go up a significant amount for up to 90 minutes. Elevate your head.Use a wedge pillow when yousleep. It'll keep your head raised just a little. That should help lower your eye pressure. Drink fluids slowly. Don't cut back on how much you drink, but spread out your beverages through the day. If you drink a lot at once, it can strain your eyes. Don't have more than a quart at one time. Instead, sip small amounts. Protect your eyes.Put on protective glasses when you work in the yard or play contact sports. Wear goggles when you swim. When choosingmakeup, use non-allergenic brands and replace items often. Be sure to wearsunglassesoutside, especially in summer or around high-glare surfaces such as sand, snow, and water. When you have glaucoma, your eyes can be very sensitive to glare. Don't rub.Glaucoma and the medicine you take might make your eyes feel itchy. But fight the urge. You can scratch them and make things worse. Ask your doctor if you can use drops to treat dryness. Drive safely.Most people with glaucoma can still drive as long as they pass their state’s vision test. Simply put, your ability to drive will depend on how much vision has been lost. Some people with advanced glaucoma can get their license renewed with restrictions. Ask your doctor about whether driving will be a concern for you. Be careful withyoga.You may need to reconsider some yoga positions. Some head-down moves that put yourheartabove your eye can increase your eye pressure. Research hasn’t shown that it makes glaucoma worse, but it’s not a good idea to do yoga positions that increase eye pressure. You may want to avoid poses such as: A glaucoma diagnosis can be scary. Many older people are dealing with several problems that come with age. They often worry that they will become a burden to the family if they lose their vision. So first, reassure your parent that many people keep their vision with proper medication and care. Next, help your loved one establish a routine so they get their eye drops correctly on schedule. They may have to put them in several times a day. This can be especially difficult for people witharthritis, and it’s not an easy task for anyone to remember. You could offer to help, maybe by stopping by the house or by calling with a reminder. Otherwise, talk with your parent's doctor to make sure a plan is in place. Following a treatment plan is extremely important in glaucoma to prevent permanentvision loss. If your parent needs surgery, do what you can to help them prepare, and arrange transportation to follow-up visits to the doctor. Many services and products can help someone with impaired vision continue to write checks, organize their kitchen, tell time, and even play cards. Contact theGlaucoma Foundationto learn more. Remember, the best help you can offer is your emotional support. You can’t prevent glaucoma. But if you find it early, you can lower your risk of eye damage. These steps may help protect your vision: Tell your doctor whatmedicationsyou’re taking. Certain drugs, even over-the-counter medications—especially those used to treatsinusandcoldcongestion andstomachand intestinal disorders—may cause an acute closed-angle glaucoma attack. Bring a list of all your medications with you to the eye doctor. Photo credit: Rob3000/Dreamstime SOURCES: National Institutes of Health. Glaucoma Research Foundation. Glaucoma Research Foundation: “Other Types of Glaucoma,” “Questions & Answers: Normal-Tension Glaucoma,” “Symptoms of Angle-Closure Glaucoma,” “Medication Guide,” “What Can I Do To Prevent Glaucoma?” "What You Can Do to Manage Your Glaucoma, "Dry Eyes and Glaucoma: Double Trouble," "Summertime Tips,” “Learn About Glaucoma,” “How Often Should I Have My Eyes Tested?” “Five Common Glaucoma Tests,” “Glaucoma Medications and Their Side Effects,” “Should You Be Smoking Marijuana to Treat Your Glaucoma?” American Academy of Ophthalmology: “What Are the Symptoms of Glaucoma?” “Who Is at Risk for Glaucoma?” “What Is Ocular Hypertension?” “Glaucoma Treatment,” “Does Marijuana Help Treat Glaucoma?” “Early Detection Key to Slowing Progression of Glaucoma.” Mayo Clinic: “Glaucoma.” CDC: “Don’t Let Glaucoma Steal Your Sight!” American Glaucoma Society. Weinreb, R.Lancet,2004. Curcio, C.Journal of Comparative Neurology, Oct. 1, 1990. American Academy of Ophthalmology. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: "Screening for Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma in the Primary Care Setting." Distelhorst, J.American Family Physician, May 1, 2003. National Eye Institute. BrightFocus Foundation: "9 Tips for Healthy Living with an Eye Disease." Journal of Glaucoma: "Lifestyle, Nutrition and Glaucoma,” "Regulation of intraocular pressure after water drinking." Ophthalmology: "Intraocular pressure changes and ocular biometry during Sirsasana (headstand posture) in yoga practitioners." AllAboutVision: "Research Says You Should Rethink Your Yoga Routine if You Have Glaucoma." U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: "Screening for Primary Open-Angle Glaucoma in the Primary Care Setting." Kellogg Eye Center: “Glaucoma.” American Glaucoma Society: “Position Statement on Marijuana and the Treatment of Glaucoma.” International Journal of Clinical Nutrition: “Coffee Intake and Progression of Glaucoma.” National Eye Institute: “Immediate Treatment Helps Delay Progression of Glaucoma.” Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.