If you've had a bone marrow orstem celltransplant, you'll want to watch for signs of graft versus host disease (GVHD). It's a common complication -- as many as 4 out of 5 people who get a transplant get it in some form. It happens when the cells that come from a donor mistakenly attack your own cells. Its effects can range from mild to life-threatening. A mild case of GVHD can be a good sign. If the donor immune cells attack your healthy cells, they're also fighting any leftovercancercells. Your doctor may decide it's best not to treat it. GVHD can show up in several different parts of your body. Usually, it affects yourskin,digestive system, orliver. It often starts as an itchyrashon your palms and the soles of yourfeet. You may also havenausea, vomiting, ordiarrhea. Some of these symptoms can be side effects of the transplant or of procedures ormedicationsthat go along with it. They can also mean you have an infection. Your doctor may take a sample of tissue, called abiopsy, from the affected part of your body to find out. A specialist will look for signs of GVHD in the sample under a microscope. There are two main types, based on when symptoms show up. Acute GVHD usually happens within 100 days of the transplant. Chronic GVHD usually appears later. You're more likely to get the chronic form if you've had the acute form, and sometimes the two happen at the same time. Beyond the timing, differences in symptoms help determine what kind you have. With acute GVHD, you may have: A rash and digestive problems are also symptoms of chronic GVHD. But it involves other parts of your body, too. You may have: GVHD is broken into different stages and grades based on how bad the symptoms are. These stages and grades help doctors decide how to treat it and can be a sign of how likely you are to recover. Duringchemotherapy, cells inside your bone marrow that makebloodare killed along withcancercells. A transplant of someone else's bone marrow or stem cells lets your body make new blood cells. But with GVHD, donor immune cells can attack your healthy cells as if they were bacteria or a virus. You're most likely to get it if your proteins which protect your body's cells don't match your donor's very well. Other things that can increase your risk include: The more closely your cells match those of your donor, the better. Unless you have an identical twin, your best match will be a sibling or parent. But you may find a good match in a national registry. The risk also goes down if doctors get the donor cells from umbilical cord blood rather than peripheral blood or bone marrow. Certain medications taken before and after the transplant can help prevent GVHD. You'll get a combination of drugs that slow down your immune system to keep the new white blood cells from going on the attack. If your GVHD is severe enough to need treatment, your doctor probably will prescribe a combination of corticosteroids, such asprednisone, and drugs that slow down yourimmune system,such ascyclosporine. Those can make it harder for your body to fight infections, so you may also get prophylacticantibiotics. If the problem persists, your doctor may prescribe a kinase inhibitor. Other treatments can help you manage the symptoms in specific parts of your body. GVHD usually goes away a year or so after the transplant, when your body starts to make its own white blood cells from the donor cells. But some people have to manage it for many years. SOURCES: Medscape: "Graft Versus Host Disease." Cancer Research UK: "Graft versus host disease (GVHD)." Leukemia & Lymphoma Society: "Graft Versus Host Disease." UpToDate: "Clinical manifestations, diagnosis and grading of acute graft-versus-host disease." National Marrow Donor Program: "Graft-versus-host disease." Chronic Graft Versus Host Disease Consortium. Medications, natural treatments, and other things that can help. Here's what to expect. Is this approach right for you? Tips that can help during treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.