Grover’s disease is a rare, temporary skin condition. It causes sudden red, raised, blistery, and sometimes very itchy spots that form around the middle of the body. The rash is most often seen in middle-aged men. Another name for this condition is transient acantholytic dermatosis (TAD). Grover’s disease usually happens in men over 50. However, women sometimes get it, too. Scientists aren’t sure what causes Grover’s disease. It may appear for no reason. Some doctors think that sun-damaged skin or extreme swings in temperature play a role. One popular, but unproven, theory is that it may be linked to sweating. Many cases have occurred in men who use hot tubs, steam rooms, electric blankets, and other warming items. It can also be caused by certain medications, organ transplants, kidney disease, Dialysis, or exposure to x rays. The main symptoms of Grover’s disease are: Symptoms usually last about 6 to 12 months, but may go away sooner or take longer to disappear. Your doctor will examine you and the rash. Sometimes it can be tough to tell the difference between Grover’s disease and other skin disorders. A shaved skin biopsy can confirm the diagnosis. If you have a mild rash, the first treatments may include: If your symptoms are very bad, your doctor may suggest retinoids or an antibiotic taken by mouth. But, these medicines can cause side effects (some may be severe). Always talk to your doctor about the risks and benefits of the medications you are prescribed. Severe, stubborn symptoms can be hard to treat and may keep coming back. This could mean you need long-term treatment. Your doctor may prescribe light therapy combined with medications if this happens. Other treatments that may be used for severe symptoms are: Your doctor may also suggest you reduce activities that can cause a lot of sweating (like heavy-duty workouts), since sweating can worsen the rash. Your doctor might also recommend that you take fewer baths and showers, and that you don’t spend a lot of time in the sun. SOURCES: American Osteopathic College of Dermatology. “Grover’s Disease.” National Organization for Rare Diseases. “Grover’s Disease.” Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Grover’s Disease.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.