Heart failure affects nearly 6 million Americans. Roughly 670,000 people are diagnosed with heart failure each year. It’s the main reason people older than 65 go into the hospital. Heart failure doesn’t mean the heart has stopped working. Rather, it means that the heart works less efficiently than normal. Due to various possible causes, blood moves through the heart and body at a slower rate, and pressure in the heart increases. As a result, the heart can’t  pump enough oxygen and nutrients to meet the body's needs. The chambers of the heart may respond by stretching to hold more blood to pump through the body or by becoming stiff and thickened. This helps to keep the blood moving, but the heart muscle walls may eventually weaken and become unable to pump as efficiently. The kidneys may respond by causing the body to retain fluid (water) and salt. If fluid builds up in the arms, legs, ankles, feet, lungs, or other organs, the body becomes congested. Congestive heart failure is the term used to describe the condition. Heart failure is caused by many conditions that damage the heart muscle, including: Coronary artery disease. Coronary artery disease (CAD), a disease of the arteries that supply blood and oxygen to the heart, causes decreased blood flow to the heart muscle. If the arteries become blocked or severely narrowed, the heart becomes starved for oxygen and nutrients. You may not have any symptoms of heart failure, or the symptoms may be mild to severe. Symptoms can be constant or can come and go. The symptoms can include: If you have heart failure, you may have one or all of these symptoms or you may have none of them. They may or may not indicate a weakened heart. Systolic dysfunction (or systolic heart failure) happens when the heart muscle doesn't contract with enough force, so there is less oxygen-rich blood pumped throughout the body. Diastolic dysfunction (or diastolic heart failure) happens when the heart contracts normally, but the ventricles don’t relax properly or are stiff, and less blood enters the heart during normal filling. A calculation done during an echocardiogram, called theejection fraction(EF), is used to measure how well your heart pumps with each beat to help determine if systolic or diastolic dysfunction is present. Your doctor can discuss which condition you have. Your doctor will ask you many questions about your symptoms and medical history. You’ll be asked about any conditions you have that may cause heart failure (such as coronary artery disease, angina, diabetes, heart valve disease, and high blood pressure). You’ll be asked if you smoke, take drugs, drink alcohol (and how much you drink), and about which medications you take. You’ll also get a complete physical exam. Your doctor will listen to your heart and look for signs of heart failure as well as other illnesses that may have caused your heart muscle to weaken or stiffen. Your doctor may also order other tests to determine the cause and severity of your heart failure. These include: Other tests may be ordered, depending on your condition. There are more treatment options available for heart failure than ever before. Tight control over your medications and lifestyle, coupled with careful monitoring, are the first steps. As the condition progresses, doctors specializing in the treatment of heart failure can offer more advanced treatment options. The goals of treating heart failure are to try to keep it from getting worse (lowering the risk of death and the need for hospitalization), to ease symptoms, and to improve quality of life. Some common types of medicines used to treat it are: Your doctor may also recommend a program called cardiac rehabilitation to help you exercise safely and keep up a heart-healthy lifestyle. It usually includes workouts that are designed just for you, education, and tips to lower your chance of heart trouble, like quitting smoking or changing your diet. Cardiac rehab also offers emotional support. You can meet people like you who can help you stay on track. In 2001, the American Heart Association (AHA) and American College of Cardiology (ACC) described the stages of heart failure. These stages, which were updated in 2005, will help you understand that heart failure is often a progressive condition and can worsen over time. They will also help you understand why a new medication was added to your treatment plan and may help you understand why lifestyle changes and other treatments are needed. The stages classified by the AHA and ACC are different than the New York Heart Association (NYHA) clinical classifications of heart failure that rank patients as class I-II-III-IV, according to the degree of symptoms or functional limits. Ask your doctor what stage of heart failure you are in. Check the table below to see if your therapy matches what the AHA and ACC recommend. Note that you cannot go backward in stage, only forward. The table below outlines a basic plan of care that may or may not apply to you, based on the cause of your heart failure and your special needs. Ask your doctor to explain therapies that are listed if you do not understand why you are or are not receiving them. Stage Definition of Stage Usual Treatments Stage A People at high risk of developing heart failure (pre-heart failure), including people with: Stage B People diagnosed with systolic left ventricular dysfunction but who have never had symptoms of heart failure (pre-heart failure), including people with: The diagnosis is usually made when an ejection fraction of less than 40% is found during an echocardiogram test. If appropriate, surgery options should be discussed for patients who have had a heart attack. Stage C Patients with known systolic heart failure and current or prior symptoms. Most common symptoms include: Stage D Patients with systolic heart failure and presence of advanced symptoms after receiving optimum medical care. The New York Heart Association (NYHA) clinical classifications of heart failure rank people as class I-II-III-IV, according to the degree of symptoms or functional limits. You can ask your doctor if you want to know what stage of heart failure you’re in. In an effort to prevent further heart damage: There are several different types of medications that are best avoided in those with heart failure, including: If you’re taking any of these drugs, discuss them with your doctor. It’s important to know the names of your medications, what they’re used for, and how often and at what times you take them. Keep a list of your medications and bring them with you to each of your doctor visits. Never stop taking your medications without discussing it with your doctor. Even if you have no symptoms, your medications decrease the work of your heart so that it can pump more effectively. There are several things you can do to improve your quality of life if you have heart failure. Among them: In heart failure, surgery may sometimes prevent further damage to the heart and improve the heart's function. Procedures used include: Heart failure management is a team effort, and you are the key player on the team. Your heart doctor will prescribe your medications and manage other medical problems. Other team members -- including nurses, dietitians, pharmacists, exercise specialists, and social workers -- will help you achieve success. But it is up to YOU to take your medications, make dietary changes, live a healthy lifestyle, keep your follow-up appointments, and be an active member of the team. If you notice anything unusual, don't wait until your next appointment to discuss it with your doctor. Call them right away if you have:  Go to the ER or call 911 if you have: With the right care, heart failure may not stop you from doing the things you enjoy. Your prognosis or outlook for the future will depend on how well your heart muscle is functioning, your symptoms, and how well you respond to and follow your treatment plan. Everyone with a long-term illness such as heart failure should discuss their desires for extended medical care with their doctor and family. An advance directive or living will is one way to let everyone know your wishes. A living will expresses your desires about the use of medical treatments to prolong your life. This document is prepared while you are fully competent in case you are unable to make these decisions at a later time. SOURCES: CDC. The Cleveland Clinic Heart and Vascular Institute. American College of Cardiology. American Heart Association: "Heart Failure." Silver, W., ''Success With Heart Failure: Help and Hope for Those with Congestive Heart Failure,'' HarperCollins, 3rd edition October 16, 2002. Heart Failure Society of America: "Learn More About Heart Failure." National Institutes of Health: "How Is Heart Failure Treated?" International Journal of clinical Practice: “Ivabradine -- the first selective sinus node If channel inhibitor in the treatment of stable angina.” Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.