Helicobacter pylori(H. pylori) is a type of bacteria. These germs can enter your body and live in your digestive tract. After many years, they can cause sores, called ulcers, in the lining of yourstomachor the upper part of your small intestine. For some people, an infection can lead tostomach cancer. Infection withH. pyloriis common. About two-thirds of the world’s population has it in their bodies. For most people, it doesn’t cause ulcers or any other symptoms. If you do have problems, there are medicines that can kill the germs and help sores heal. As more of the world gets access to clean water and sanitation, fewer people than before are getting the bacteria.With good health habits, you can protect yourself and your children fromH. pylori. For decades, doctors thought people got ulcers from stress, spicy foods, smoking, or other lifestyle habits. But when scientists discoveredH. pyloriin 1982, they found that the germs were the cause of moststomachulcers. AfterH. pylorienters your body, it attacks the lining of your stomach, which usually protects you from the acid your body uses to digest food. Once the bacteria have done enough damage, acid can get through the lining, which leads to ulcers. These may bleed, cause infections, or keep food from moving through your digestive tract. You can getH. pylorifrom food, water, or utensils. It’s more common in countries or communities that lack clean water or good sewage systems. You can also pick up the bacteria through contact with thesalivaor other body fluids of infected people. Many people getH. pyloriduring childhood, but adults can get it, too. The germs live in the body for years before symptoms start, but most people who have it will never get ulcers. Doctors aren’t sure why only some people get ulcers after an infection. If you have an ulcer, you may feel a dull or burning pain in your belly. It may come and go, but you’ll probably feel it most when your stomach is empty, such as between meals or in the middle of the night. It can last for a few minutes or for hours. You may feel better after you eat, drink milk, or take an antacid. Other signs of an ulcer include: Ulcers can bleed into your stomach orintestines, which can be dangerous to your health. Get medical help right away if you have any of these symptoms: It’s not common, butH. pyloriinfection can cause stomachcancer. The disease has few symptoms at first, such as heartburn. Over time, you may notice: If you don’t have symptoms of an ulcer, your doctor probably won’t test you forH. pylori. But if you have them now or have in the past, it’s best to get tested. Medicines like nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can also damage your stomach lining, so it’s important to find out what’s causing your symptoms so you can get the right treatment. To start, your doctor will ask you about your medical history, your symptoms, and any medicines you take. Then they’ll give you aphysical exam, including pressing on your belly to check for swelling, tenderness, or pain. You may also have: To look more closely at your ulcers, your doctor may use: If you haveH. pylori, your doctor may also test you for stomach cancer. This includes: If you have ulcers caused byH. pylori, you’ll need treatment to kill the germs, heal your stomach lining, and keep the sores from coming back.It usually takes 1 to 2 weeks of treatment to get better. Your doctor will probably tell you to take a few different types of drugs. The options include: Your treatment could mean you’ll take 14 or more pills per day for a few weeks, which seems like a lot of medicine. But it’s really important to take everything that your doctor prescribes and to follow their instructions. If you don’t take antibiotics the right way, bacteria in your body can become resistant to them, which makes infections harder to treat. If yourmedicationsbother you, talk to your doctor about your treatment options and how you can handle side effects. About 1-2 weeks after you finish your treatment, your doctor may test your breath or stool again to make sure the infection is gone. You can protect yourself from getting anH. pyloriinfection with the same steps you take to keep other germs at bay: Though stress and spicy foods don’t cause ulcers, they can keep them from healing quickly or make your pain worse. Talk to your doctor about ways to manage your stress, improve your diet, and, if you smoke, how you can get help to quit. Most ulcers caused byH. pyloriwill heal after a few weeks of treatment. If you’ve had one, you should avoid taking NSAIDs for pain, since these drugs can damage your stomach lining. If you need pain medicine, ask your doctor to recommend some. You can find information aboutH. pyloriinfection and ulcers from theAmerican College of Gastroenterology. For information on stomach cancer, as well as online and local support groups, visit theAmerican Cancer Society. SOURCES: National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse: “Peptic Ulcer Disease and H. Pylori.” National Cancer Institute: “Helicobacter pylori and Cancer.” KidsHealth: “Infections: Helicobacter Pylori.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “The Burden of Digestive Diseases: Peptic Ulcer Disease.” American College of Gastroenterology: “Peptic Ulcer Disease.” UpToDate. “Helicobacter pylori infection and treatment.” American Cancer Society: “How is stomach cancer diagnosed?” “How is stomach cancer treated?” and “Signs and symptoms of stomach cancer.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.