Hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) is a common infection in children that causes sores called ulcers inside or around theirmouthand arashorblisterson their hands,feet, legs, or buttocks. It can be painful, but it isn't serious. It’s not the same thing as foot-and-mouth disease, which comes from a different virus and affects only animals.. The viruses that usually cause hand, foot, and mouth are namedcoxsackievirusa16 and enterovirus 71. Anyone can have the disease, but children under age 5 are most likely to get it. It tends to spread easily in the summer and fall. Early symptoms may include: A day or two later, a child might have: Mouth sores can make it hurt to swallow. Eating or drinking less than usual could be the only sign of a child’s illness. Be sure they get enough fluids and nutrients. The viruses that cause HFMD lurk in the fluids in an infected person’s body, including: Hand, foot, and mouth disease spreads through:  Your doctor will ask about your child’s symptoms and look at any sores or rashes. This is usually enough for them to decide if it’s hand, foot, and mouth disease. But they might also swab your child’s throat or take a sample of poop orbloodfor lab testing. There’s no cure orvaccinefor hand, foot, and mouth disease. Because a virus causes it,antibioticswon’t help. It usually goes away on its own after 7 to 10 days. In the meantime, you can help your child feel better with:  Serious complications from hand, foot, and mouth disease are rare. Enterovirus 71 is more likely to cause problems than other HFMD viruses. Complications may include:  Your child is most contagious in the first 7 days of the illness. But the virus can stay in their body for days or weeks and spread through theirspitor poop. Take these steps to lower the chance of infection:  Photo Credit: Science Photo Library / Science Source SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: “Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease.” CDC: “Hand-Foot-and-Mouth Disease.” National Organization for Rare Diseases: “Hand-Foot-Mouth Syndrome.” World Health Organization Western Pacific: “A Guide to Clinical Management and Public Health Response for Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease (HFMD).” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Hand, foot, and mouth disease.” StatPearls: “Hand Foot and Mouth Disease.” Nemours/KidsHealth: “Hand, Foot, and Mouth Disease.” UpToDate: “Hand, foot, and mouth disease and herpangina.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Photo Caption Mayo Clinic - Photo Caption Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.