Angina is chest pain that happens because there isn't enough blood going to part of your heart. It can feel like aheart attack, with pressure or squeezing in your chest. It’s sometimes called angina pectoris or ischemic chest pain. It's a symptom of heart disease, and it happens when something blocks your arteries or there's not enough blood flow in the arteries that bring oxygen-rich blood to your heart. Angina usually goes away quickly. Still, it can be a sign of a life-threatening heart problem. It's important to find out what's going on and what you can do to avoid a heart attack. Usually, medicine and lifestyle changes can control angina. If it's more severe, you may need surgery, too. Or you may need what’s called a stent, a tiny tube that props open arteries. There are different types of angina: Stable angina.This is the most common. Physical activity or stress can trigger it. It usually lasts a few minutes, and it goes away when you rest. It isn't a heart attack, but it can be a sign that you're more likely to have one. Tell your doctor if this happens to you. Unstable angina.You can have this while you're at rest or not very active. The pain can be strong and long-lasting, and it may come back again and again. It can be a signal that you're about to have a heart attack, so see a doctor right away. Microvascular angina.With this type, you have chest pain but no coronary artery blockage. Instead, it happens because your smallest coronary arteries aren’t working the way they should, so your heart doesn’t get the blood it needs. The chest pain usually lasts more than 10 minutes. This type is more common in women. Prinzmetal's angina (variant angina).This type is rare. It might happen at night while you're sleeping or resting. Your heart arteries suddenly tighten or narrow. It can cause a lot of pain, and you should get it treated. Chest pain is the symptom, but it affects people differently. You may have: You might mistake an aching or burning for heartburn or gas. You’re likely to have pain behind your breastbone, which can spread to your shoulders, arms, neck, throat, jaw, or back. Stable angina often gets better with rest. Unstable angina may not, and it could get worse. It’s an emergency that needs medical help right away. Men often feel pain in their chest, neck, and shoulders. Women may feel discomfort in their belly, neck, jaw, throat, or back. You may also have shortness of breath, sweating, or dizziness. One study found that women were more likely to use the words "pressing" or "crushing" to describe the feeling. Angina usually happens because of heart disease. A fatty substance called plaque builds up in your arteries, blocking blood flow to your heart muscle. This forces your heart to work with less oxygen. That causes pain. You may also haveblood clotsin the arteries of your heart, which can cause heart attacks. Less common causes of chest pain include:  Some things about you or your lifestyle could put you at higher risk of angina, including:  Your doctor will do a physical exam and ask about your symptoms, risk factors, and family history. They might need to do tests including: Angina questions for your doctor  Your treatment depends on how much damage there is to your heart. For people with mild angina, medicine and lifestyle changes can often help their blood flow better and control their symptoms. Medicines Your doctor might prescribe medicines including: Cardiac procedures If meds aren't enough, you may need to have blocked arteries opened with a medical procedure or surgery. This could be: Angioplasty/stenting.The doctor threads a tiny tube, with a balloon inside, through a blood vessel and up to your heart. Then, they inflate the balloon inside the narrowed artery to widen it and restore blood flow. They may insert a small tube called a stent inside your artery to help keep it open. The stent is permanent and usually made of metal. It can also be made of a material that your body absorbs over time. Some stents also have medicine that helps keep your artery from getting blocked again. The procedure usually takes less than 2 hours. You’ll probably stay overnight at the hospital. Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), or bypass surgery.Your surgeon takes healthy arteries or veins from another part of your body and uses them to go around the blocked or narrowed blood vessels. You can expect to stay in the hospital about a week after you have this. You'll be in the intensive care unit for a day or two while nurses and doctors keep a close eye on your heart rate, blood pressure, and oxygen levels. You'll then move to a regular room to recover. Enhanced external counterpulsation Enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP) may be an option to relieve your angina. Your doctor may recommend it if other treatments haven’t worked or aren’t right for you. EECP uses several blood pressure cuffs on both legs to gently, but firmly, compress the blood vessels there to boost blood flow to your heart. Each wave is timed to your heartbeat. So more blood goes there when it’s relaxing. When your heart pumps again, pressure is released right away. This lets blood be pumped more easily.Itcan help your blood vessels make a natural bypass around narrowed or blocked arteries that cause your chest pain. It may help some small blood vessels in your heart open. They may give more blood flow to your heart muscle to help ease your chest pain. You might have EECP if you: EECP isn’t invasive. If you’re accepted for EECP treatment, you’ll have 35 hours of therapy. It’s given 1 to 2 hours a day, 5 days a week, for 7 weeks. Studies have shown its benefits include less need for anti-anginal medicine, fewer symptoms, and the ability to be more active without symptoms Lifestyle changes You can still be active, but it's important to listen to your body. If you feel pain, stop what you’re doing and rest. Know what triggers your angina, like stress or intense exercise. Try to avoid things that tend to set it off. For example, if large meals cause problems, eat smaller ones and eat more often. If you still feel pain, talk to your doctor about having more tests or changing your medications. Because angina can be a sign of something dangerous, it’s important to get checked out. These lifestyle tips may help protect your heart: If you smoke, stop.It can damage your blood vessels and increase your heart disease risk. Eat a heart-healthy dietto lower your blood pressure and cholesterol levels. When those are out of normal range, your chance for heart disease can rise. Eat mainly fruits and vegetables, whole grains, fish, lean meat, and fat-free or low-fat dairy. Limit salt, fat, and sugar. Use stress-relieving measureslike meditation, deep breathing, oryogato relax. Exercisemost days of the week. See your doctor regularly. If you have chest pain that is new or unusual for you, and you think you may be having a heart attack, call 911 right away. Quick treatment is very important. It can protect you from more damage. Angina raises your risk of having a heart attack. But it’s treatable. Consider it a warning sign and make healthy choices. Talk with others who have it. That may help you learn how to feel better. Your family, too, may need support to help them understand your angina. They'll want to know what they can do to help. SOURCES: American Heart Association: "Angina (Chest Pain)," "Angina in Women Can Be Different Than Men," "Cardiac Catheterization and Angiogram," “Microvascular Angina,” “Unstable Angina,” Angina in Women Can Be Different Than Men.” JAMA Internal Medicine: "Reconstructing Angina: Cardiac Symptoms Are the Same in Women and Men." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Angina,” "What is Angina?" "What Is an Electrocardiogram?" Stanford Health Care: “Angina.” Mayo Clinic: “Angina.” American Association for Clinical Chemistry: “Angina,” “Troponin.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Microvascular Angina: Why Women Shouldn’t Ignore Chest Pain and Fatigue.” UpToDate: “Patient education: Chest pain (Beyond the Basics).” HeartHealthyWomen.org: "EECP: What is enhanced external counterpulsation (EECP)?" Cleveland Clinic: "Enhanced external counterpulsation." Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.