Hearing lossis the condition that results when any part of yourearisn’t working the way it should. It’s the third most common health problem in the U.S, and it can affect the quality of your life and relationships. About 48 million Americans have lost some hearing. You can have three different types ofhearing loss, depending on where your hearing is damaged. Your hearing loss can be: Certain conditions, including age, illness, and genetics, may play a role in hearing loss. Modern life has added a host of ear-damaging elements to the list, including somemedicationsand many sources of loud, ongoing noise. Learn more about thecommon causes of hearing loss. With so many untreatable cases of hearing loss, prevention is the best way to keep hearing long-term. If you've already lost some hearing, there are ways to stay connected and communicate with friends and family. In many cases, hearing fades so slowly you don't notice it. You may think people are mumbling more, your spouse needs to speak up, or you need a better phone. As long as some sound still comes in, you could assume your hearing is fine. But you may become more and more cut off from the world of speech and sounds. Sohow do you know if you are losing your hearing? Doctors classify hearing loss by degrees. Early on, high-pitched sounds, such as children's and female voices, and the sounds "S" and "F" become harder to make out. You may also: Your ear has three main areas that play a part in hearing. Sound waves go through your: Advanced age is the most common cause of hearing loss. One out of three people between 65 and 74 has some level of hearing loss. After age 75, that goes up to one out of every two people. Researchers don't fully understand why hearing declines with age. It could be that lifetime exposure to noise and other damaging factors slowly wears down the ears' delicate mechanics. Your genes are also part of the mix. Noise wears down hearing if it's loud or continuous. The CDC reports that about 22 million American workers are exposed to dangerous noise levels on the job. This includes many carpenters, construction workers, soldiers, miners, factory workers, and farmers. Musicians are also at risk for noise-induced hearing loss. Some now wear special earplugs to protect their ears when they perform. The earplugs allow them to hear music without harming their ears' inner workings. Certain medications can impair hearing or balance. More than 200 drugs and chemicals have a track record of triggering hearing and balance side effects in addition to their disease-fighting abilities. Sudden hearing loss, the rapid loss of 30 decibels or more of hearing ability, can happen over several hours or up to 3 days. (A normal conversation is 60 decibels.) Sudden hearing loss usually affects only one ear. Although there are up to three new cases per every 10,000 people each year, doctors are not able to discover the cause in most cases. Illnesses such asheart disease,high blood pressure, anddiabetesput ears at risk by interfering with the ears' blood supply.Otosclerosisis a bone disease of the middle ear, and Ménière's disease affects the inner ear. Both can cause hearing loss. Trauma, especially a skull fracture or punctured eardrum, puts ears at serious risk for hearing loss. Infection orearwaxcan block ear canals and lessen hearing.  To figure out how much of your hearing you’ve lost, your doctor can do the following tests: There are also tablet and smartphone apps you can use on your own to screen for hearing loss. How you’re treated depends on the type and source of your hearing loss. Prompt medical treatment for sudden hearing loss may raise your chance of recovery. Not being able to hear the world around you can affect your quality of life. It can cause feelings ofdepressionand isolation, especially in older adults. Over time, you can start to have problems with your mental function. Studies that look at treating hearing loss show that as your hearing gets better, so does your brain function, especially your memory.  For starters, set up your home so your rooms are well lit and places to sit face each other. When people talk, watch their mouths move as well as their facial expressions. Remove sources of background noise you don’t need. For instance, turn off the TV when no one's watching it. Let people know what they can do to help you understand them better: Hearing loss is often permanent, so do what you can to protect one of your most valuable natural assets. Wear earplugs when you're around sounds as loud or louder than traffic. Lawn mowers, power sanders, vacuums, and most concerts are all loud enough to harm unprotected ears. When possible, move away from the source of the noise. For example, cross the street or cover your ears when you walk past a loud road construction site. If your workplace is noisy, talk to your employer about ear safety. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) recommends that employers install barrier walls or mufflers in noisy plants to protect their workers' hearing. Be aware that recreational activities also come with high noise levels. Things to watch out for include video arcades, fireworks displays, live music concerts, sporting events, music from your headphones, and even some children’s toys. If you know you’re going to be somewhere noisy, limit your time there and wear ear protection. As a general rule, if you have to shout to be heard 3 feet away, it’s too loud. SOURCES: American Academy of Audiology: "Hearing and Hearing Loss," "Facts About Hearing Loss." American Speech-Language-Hearing Association: "The Prevalence and Incidence of Hearing Loss in Adults," "Causes of Hearing Loss in Adults," "Ototoxic Medications (Medication Effects)," "Adult Aural/Audiologic Rehabilitation." National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders: "Hearing Loss and Older Adults," "Sudden Deafness," "Quick Statistics," "Presbycusis." National Academy on an Aging Society: "Hearing Loss: A growing problem that affects quality of life." National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. "Work-related Hearing Loss." American Tinnitus Association: "How Loud is Too Loud?" FDA: "Questions and Answers about Viagra, Levitra, Cialis, and Revatio: Possible Sudden Hearing Loss." American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery: "Hearing Loss." University of California, San Francisco Medical Center: "Hearing Loss." UpToDate: "Meniere disease." Hearing Loss Association of America: "Basic Facts About Hearing Loss." CDC: “Types of Hearing Loss.” Mayo Clinic: “Hearing Loss.” Center for Hearing and Communication: “Recreational noise levels facts.”  © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.