A hiatal hernia is when your stomach bulges up into your chest through an opening in your diaphragm, the muscle that separates the two areas. The opening is called the hiatus, so this condition is also called a hiatushernia. There are two main types of hiatal hernias: sliding and paraesophageal. Ordinarily, youresophagus(food pipe) goes through the hiatus and attaches to yourstomach. In a sliding hiatal hernia, your stomach and the lower part of your esophagus slide up into your chest through the diaphragm. Most people with hiatal hernias have this type. A paraesophageal hernia is more dangerous. Your esophagus and stomach stay where they should be, but part of your stomach squeezes through the hiatus to sit next to your esophagus. Your stomach can become squeezed and lose its blood supply. Your doctor might call this a strangulated hernia.    Many people with hiatal hernia don’t notice any symptoms. Others may have: Get medical care right away if you have a hiatal hernia and: These could be signs of a strangulated hernia or an obstruction, which are medical emergencies. Doctors don’t know why most hiatal hernias happen. Causes might include: Hiatal hernias happen more often in women, people who are overweight, and people older than 50. To diagnose a hiatal hernia, your doctor may do tests including: Ifanemiais a concern, your doctor may take a blood sample to check your red blood cell count. Most people don’t notice symptoms of a hiatal hernia and don’t need treatment. If you haveacid reflux, your doctor may suggest medications to treat those symptoms, including: Your doctor might do surgery if you have a paraesophageal hernia (when part of your stomach squeezes through the hiatus) so your stomach doesn’t become strangled. You may also need surgery if sliding hernias bleed or become large, strangulated, or inflamed. In surgery, your doctor reinforces your hiatus and moves your stomach. Many hiatal hernia surgeries use a method called laparoscopy. Your doctor will make a few small (5 to 10 millimeter) cuts in your belly. They insert a tool called a laparoscope through these incisions, and it sends pictures to a monitor so your doctor can see inside your body. These “minimally invasive” procedures have smaller cuts, less risk of infection, less pain and scarring, and faster recovery than traditional surgeries. You can probably go back to regular activity in 2 weeks. Some changes to your daily life can help withacid reflux symptoms. They include: SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. National Institutes of Health. Merck. Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Hiatus Hernia.” Cleveland Clinic: “Hiatal Hernia.” University of Rochester Medical Center: “Hiatal Hernia.” Mayo Clinic: “Hiatal hernia.” World Journal of Gastroenterology: “Addition of prokinetics to PPI therapy in gastroesophageal reflux disease: A meta-analysis.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.