Your hip is the joint where your thigh bone meets your pelvis. It is called a ball-and-socket joint, because the ball-like top of your thigh bone fits into a cup-like area within your pelvis, much like a baseball fits into a glove.   Normally, the ball glides smoothly within the socket, but a problem with the ball or socket rim can interfere with smooth motion, leading  tohip impingementor femoro acetabular impingement (FAI). It is believed to be a major cause of earlyosteoarthritis of the hip, particularly in those under age 40. You can have hip impingement for years and not know it, because it is often not painful in its early stages. When hip impingement causes symptoms, it may be referred to as hip impingement syndrome. The main symptoms are  "pain" in the groin, especially when walking or flexing the hip, and decreased range of motion in the hip. At first, you may only feel pain when you move the hip near its limits. As the condition progresses, however, you may feel pain with more subtle activities, such as sitting for a long time or walking up a hill. Pain that occurs at night or when walking on flat ground suggests that the cartilage cushioning the ball and socket has begun to break down and wear away, a condition known as osteoarthritis. There are two main causes of hip impingement: A deformity of the ball at the top of the femur (called cam impingement).If the head is not shaped normally, the abnormal part of the head can jam in the socket when the hip is bent. This may occur during activities such as riding a bicycle or tying your shoes. A deformity of the socket (pincer impingement).If the front rim of the socket (called the acetabulum) sticks out too far, the area of the thigh bone (femur) just below the ball, called the neck of the femur, may bump into the rim of the socket during normal hip flexion movement. In some cases, there is a problem with both the ball and the socket. Other problems that can cause hip impingement include conditions such as:  If you have symptoms of hip impingement, your doctor can diagnose the problem based on your description of your symptoms, aphysical exam, and the findings of imaging tests. These tests may include one or more of the following: Treatment for hip impingement should begin with: If these treatments do not relieve pain, your doctor may recommend hip impingement surgery. The type of surgery needed will depend on the problem causing hip impingement and how much cartilage damage has occurred. Often, surgery for hip impingement can be performed arthroscopically. This technique involves inserting a lighted scope and thin tools through small incisions over your hip instead of making a large incision.Arthroscopyis usually an outpatient surgery. This means you can go home the same day. The earlier you have surgery, the greater your chances of a complete recovery. But even if cartilage has been damaged, surgery may still reduce pain and improve range of motion. If cartilage damage is severe, however,hip replacementmay be the only treatment that will relieve pain and improve function. However, there are promising experimental treatments, including one in which parts of your ownbloodare injected into joints to stimulate cartilage growth. SOURCES:MedlinePlus: "Hip Injuries and Disorders."Children's Hospital Boston: "Hip Impingement."Emory Healthcare: "Femoroacetabular Impingement (FAI)."University of Maryland Medical Center: "Legg-Calve-Perthes disease -- Overview" and "Slipped capital femoral epiphysis -- Overview." Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center: "Coxa Vara."Hospital for Special Surgery: "How is hip impingement diagnosed?" and "Hip Mobility and Hip Arthroscopy: A Patient's Guide to Correcting Femoro-acetabular Impingement." RadiologyInfo.org: "What is CT Scanning of the Body?"Cedars-Sinai: "Hip Impingement." Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.