When you’re recovering from an illness or surgery, or you have a condition that affects how well you can move, the tasks of daily life can be challenging. Here’s advice on the strategies and tools that can help you live safely and comfortably in your home. What is mobility? Mobility is how well you can walk and move, whether that’s getting to the bathroom or kitchen on your own, or doing fun things like going out to lunch with friends and traveling. Many people lose mobility as they age or because of health conditions or surgery. When you can’t walk easily or comfortably you may stay home more, which can leave you feeling lonely and cut off from people and things you enjoy. Being mobile isn’t just important for your independence. It can also help you avoid some health problems, including depression,incontinence, heart disease, and osteoporosis. Plus, regular walking and movement can help prevent falls by keeping your muscles strong and maintaining your balance. How can I improve my mobility? The best thing you can do is get physically active. Do a combination ofaerobic exerciseto get yourheartpumping (like walking orswimming), resistance exercises to build and maintain your muscles (likelifting weights), andstretchingto improve your flexibility. You’re never too old to startexercising. No matter what your age, when you start an exercise program, you’ll benefit. There are many ways to get yourheartpumping even if you have trouble walking or are not able to move your body well. You can exercise while sitting in a chair or in a pool using flotation devices. Talk to your doctor for specific exercises. You can also ask your doctor for a referral to a physical or occupational therapist. A physical therapist will teach you exercises that will help you get moving. An occupational therapist can teach you new ways to do everyday tasks, which can increase your mobility. What are mobility aids? Mobility aids help you get around on your own without wearing yourself out orworryingabout falling. These aids give you greater independence. As a result, you’ll probably rely less on others to help you with daily tasks. What types of mobility aids are available? You might be surprised to learn how many aids are on the market. They’re designed to fit all kinds of lifestyles and budgets, and they range from low-tech to more advanced options, including canes, crutches, walkers, wheeled walkers (called rollators), manual wheelchairs, pushrim-activated power-assist wheelchairs (called PAPAWs), motorized scooters, and power wheelchairs. How do I decide which mobility aid is best for me? Your doctor can help you figure out which one is best, and an occupational therapist can help teach you how to use them. (Keep reading for more information onoccupational therapy.) Here’s some help to choose the right one for you:  Can walk by yourself but need to avoid putting too much weight on your leg or foot.  Can walk by yourself but need a wider base of support than canes or crutches can offer. You are able to lift and move a walker forward.  Can walk by yourself but need a wider base of support than canes or crutches can offer. You are not able to lift and move a walker forward, or you get tired and need rest breaks when moving.  Can no longer walk from one point to another without getting tired or without fear of falling.  Can no longer walk from one point to another without getting tired or without fear of falling but mostly need help getting around outside of your home.  Meet the qualifications for a wheelchair, but you need more help to get over surfaces like carpet, grass, curbs, and gravel.    What should I know about canes? Single-point:These are the most common and have only one point touching the ground. Multi-point or quad:With these canes, multiple points touch the ground, four in the case of quad canes. They can stand on their own and offer more support than single-point canes. What do I need to know to walk with a cane? What should I know about crutches? There are two types of crutches: What do I need to know to use crutches? What should I know about walkers and rollators? How do I use a walker or rollator? What should I know about transport wheelchairs? What should I know about manual wheelchairs? What should I know about pushrim-activated power-assist wheelchairs (PAPAWs)? Unlike manual wheelchairs, PAPAWs help you get over surfaces like grass and gravel. PAPAWs have special wheels with battery-operated motors that attach to a wheelchair. Sensors on the wheels detect when you need more “oomph,” making it easier to move the wheelchair over challenging terrain. Because you’re not exerting yourself as much as you would with a standard wheelchair, you can often move faster for longer distances. Here are other things to consider when buying or using a PAPAW: What should I know about power wheelchairs? Like motorized scooters, power wheelchairs are battery-driven. They’re usually run by a control panel that includes a joystick and set of buttons. They come in three main types based on where the drive wheel is located: Rear-wheel, mid-wheel, and front-wheel. Here are some other things to consider when buying or using power wheelchairs: What should I know about motorized scooters? These battery-powered vehicles come in different weights and sizes and have either three or four wheels. No matter how many wheels you choose, though, their basic operation is the same. You turn the scooter on and off with a key and steer with a switch. The seat swivels to the side to help you sit and stand more easily. Here are some other things to consider when buying or using motorized scooters: You will always need to check the battery before you leave the house to make sure that the scooter has enough power to make it through the day’s events. With a few tools and some simple precautions, you can prevent accidents and keep up with your daily activities. What can I do to keep stairs, steps, and floors in my home safe to avoid falls? What can I do to keep my bathroom safe and easy to use? What can I do to make my bedroom safe and getting dressed easier? What can I do to make my kitchen safe and simple to use? What can I do to make my living room safe and easier to get around? What is an occupational therapist? Occupational therapists help people who are recovering from injuries and surgery, or who are living with physical challenges, find ways to do every day activities. They may: What is a physical therapist? Physical therapists are health care professionals who work with people recovering from surgery, injury, or who are managing long term conditions. They aim to reduce your pain and improve your mobility, flexibility, strength, endurance, coordination, and balance. Physical therapy generally includes some type of exercise, along withstretching,massage, heat, ice, water,ultrasound, or electrical stimulation. Your physical therapist will examine you, talk to you about your symptoms, and create a treatment plan. They may also give you exercises to do on your own at home. When you have trouble moving around, you may spend more time sitting or lying down. Not walking for long periods can lead to problems with swelling andbloodcirculation. Those problems can, in turn, make it harder to get your mobility back. Here’s what you need to know. What is a vein disease? When the walls of your veins are damaged,bloodcan’t flow as it usually does. It collects and flows in the wrong direction, causing buildup in the veins, which can lead to swelling, sluggish blood flow, and the potential for clots. Eventually this can lead to a vein disease, which often happens in the legs. Vein diseases are more common in people who’ve had major surgery or surgery on the hips orknees, or people who sit, stand, or lie down for long periods of time without moving around. What are the symptoms of vein diseases? What isedema? Edema is swelling. It can happen anywhere in your body, but it often happens in your feet, ankles, and legs. Edema has many causes, but it’s common in people who sit for long periods, who take certainmedications, or have conditions likecongestive heart failure. If you have swelling in your body, talk to your doctor. How are edema and vein diseases treated? Treatments vary and will depend on the cause of your condition and which condition you have, so talk to your doctor about your symptoms. Some vein diseases, likeblood clots, are serious and require immediate medical help. Here are some steps you can take to prevent and manage vein disease and edema: Ask your doctor if you should wear support stockings or compression socks to keep fluid from building up in your legs and ankles. Support stockings are available over the counter, but in some cases you may need prescription stockings for more compression. What is an emergency alert device? These devices can be worn usually as a bracelet or pendant, and they have an alarm button that you can press in an emergency. It will immediately alert an operator who will send medical help. It can be lifesaving, especially if you live alone. You can choose from several different systems, each of which comes with a different monthly fee. All of them are at least water resistant (some are waterproof) so you can wear them in the shower or tub. Some will only work if they’re in range of a base generally connected to a home phone line, but others also have GPS capabilities so they work when you’re away from home, too. SOURCES: AARP: “Make Your Home’s Bathrooms Safe.” CDC: “Nonfatal Bathroom Injuries Among Persons Aged ≥ 15 Years - United States, 2008." CDC: “Check for Safety: A Home Fall Prevention Checklist for Older Adults.” CDC: “Falls Among Older Adults:  An Overview.” Cleveland Clinic: “Diseases & Conditions:  Edema.” Harvard Medical School: “Mobility and independence.” Johns Hopkins Medicine Heart & Vascular Institute: “Venous Disease.” Medicare: “Home health care: what it is and what to expect.” National Multiple Sclerosis Society: “Staying Mobile.” National Multiple Sclerosis Society: “How to Choose the Mobility Device that is Right for You.” National Safety Council: “Protect Your Loved Ones - Know About Home and Recreational Safety.” NIH: “Structured physical activity program can help maintain mobility in vulnerable older people." NIH Senior Health: “Falls and older adults:  Causes and risk factors.” NIH Senior Health: “Making Personal Changes.” National Institute on Aging: "Structured physical activity program can help maintain mobility in vulnerable older people." University of California Davis Vascular Center: “Vein problems.” University of California Davis Vascular Center: “Varicose veins.” University of California Davis Vascular Center: “Chronic venous insufficiency.” University of California Davis Vascular Center: “Deep vein thrombosis.” University of Pittsburgh Medical Center: “Walking with a Cane.” University of Pittsburgh Medical Center: “Walking With Crutches: 3-Point Sequence.” University of Pittsburgh Medical Center: “Walking With a Walker.” UpToDate: “Patient information: Edema (swelling) (Beyond the Basics)." Visiting Nurse Service of New York: “Safety-Proofing Your Parents’ Bathroom to Avoid Slips and Falls.” Visiting Nurse Service of New York: “Check for Safety.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.