Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemiais a disorder where it is hard for your body to removeLDL"bad"cholesterolfrom yourblood. The disease raises your chances of aheart attackat an early age, but drugs and other treatments can lower your risk. Cholesterol is waxy stuff that's in your cells.LDL's job is to carry cholesterol around your body in your bloodstream. When you have high levels ofLDL, cholesterol builds up in yourarteries, thebloodvessels that supply oxygen to yourheart. The cholesterol can eventually block them and shut off the flow of blood and oxygen to yourheart, causing aheart attack. Homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia is a disease you're born with. You can start developing high cholesterol when you're a child. It's a serious condition. Without treatment, men with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia can get heart disease in their 40s, and women can get it in their 50s. There's no cure, so you'll need to take drugs and follow a heart-healthy diet throughout your life. If that's not enough, there are special treatments including one that takes blood from your body, removes the cholesterol, and then returns the blood back to you. For some people, this treatment still won't keep cholesterol under control. If that's the case for you, you may need to have aliver transplant. It's major surgery with a lot of recovery time, so it's important to reach out to family and friends to get the emotional support you need. When you have homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, you inherit two copies of a gene that isn't working right, one from each of your parents. Normally, theliverremoves extra LDL cholesterol from the blood using particles called LDL receptors. These receptors attach to LDL cholesterol and play a key role in keeping yourcholesterol levelsunder control. When you have this disease, the faulty gene keeps the LDL receptors from working right. Yourcholesterol levelsget high. You may hear the termheterozygousfamilial hypercholesterolemia. This is a related disease. With it, you inherit the broken gene from only one of your parents. It's not as severe as the homozygous form. The main sign that you have this condition is very high levels of total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol. For instance, you may have a total cholesterol level of 600 points or higher. By comparison, the American Heart Association recommends the ideal total cholesterol number be less than 200. You may have yellow, waxy patches on yourskinover the elbows,knees, and buttocks. These are called xanthomas. Yellowish fat deposits called xanthelasmas can develop in your eyelids. Also, you can get gray or white circles around yourcornea, the clear front part of theeye. Somesymptoms of heart diseaseyou may have include: Your doctor will do aphysical examand also take some blood tests. To help make a diagnosis, they may ask you: Your doctor will check yourcholesterol levelsby taking a blood sample and sending it to a lab to be analyzed. You may have a blood test to look for the abnormal gene that causes this condition. Your doctor might also want to test some of your close relatives to see if they have the disease. The goal is to lower your LDL cholesterol levels, and yourrisk for heart disease. You will likely be referred to a doctor that specializes in treating people with cholesterol or lipid disorders. Your doctor will probably recommend that you stick to a diet that's low insaturated fat, cholesterol, and sugar. They may need to try different combinations of drugs and treatments until they find one that works best for you. Since homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia raises your cholesterol to extremely high levels, your doctor may start you on high doses of statin drugs.Statinswork by stopping yourliverfrom making cholesterol. Your doctor may also try combiningstatinswith other drugs that lower the amount of cholesterol that gets into your body from the food you eat. Options includeezetimibe(Zetia), a PCSK9 inhibitor like alirocumab(Praluent) andevolocumab(Repatha), orlomitapide(Juxtapid). If different combinations of medicine aren't doing the job, your doctor may also add injections of inclisiran (Leqvio) which has been approved as an add-on therapy to further lower (LDL-C). They may also ask you to try a treatment called apheresis. It removes cholesterol from your blood. It's a little bit likedialysis, the treatment that's used forkidney disease. You go to a clinic or hospital where some of your blood is removed through a tube called a catheter. LDL cholesterol is taken out of your blood before it's returned to your body. The procedure takes several hours, and you'll need to do it regularly. Sometimes, none of the treatments work. In that case, you might need a liver transplant. The newliverwill have normal LDL receptors that will remove the bad cholesterol from your blood. Your doctor will put you on a waiting list for a liver from a donor. A liver transplant is major surgery, and it could take you 6 months to a year before you can return to your regular lifestyle. After your transplant, you'll need to take drugs that prevent your body from rejecting the new liver. If you're considering a liver transplant, you'll probably need to get some emotional support from family and friends. Ask your doctor about educational workshops that can help explain what to expect before and after a transplant. Practice smart lifestyle habits to lower your risk ofheart disease. If you smoke, stop. You should limit alcohol consumption, try to reduce stress, treat/manage high blood pressure and diabetes and aim for a healthy weight. Eat a diet that's mostlyfruits and vegetables, whole grains, nuts, legumes, seafood, lean poultry, and low-fat dairy. Also, keep the fat in your diet to 30% or less of yourdaily calories. For example, if you eat 2,000 calories a day, you should eat no more than 65 grams of fat a day. Check food labels to see how much fat is in the food you eat. Try to avoid or limit sources ofsaturated fatand cholesterol, such as: Try to exercise every day, which also will help control your cholesterol levels. After you've been diagnosed, you'll work closely with a cholesterol specialist called a lipidologist. While your doctor is trying to find the treatment that works best, you'll probably need to make regular visits to get blood tests to check your cholesterol levels. It's important to be patient and take the time to get the right treatment plan for you. Sometimes your doctor might need to try several different things before your high cholesterol gets under control. You'll need to manage your condition throughout your life. Make sure you keep up with the drugs your doctor prescribes, and keep eating a healthy diet. Sometimes treatments don't work and your heart disease risk remains high. Ask your doctor about joining aclinical trial. These trials test new drugs to see if they're safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine that isn't available to everyone. Make sure you have a support network in place that can give you an emotional lift when you need it. You can also join a support group to get ideas and help from other people who know what you're going through. To learn more about homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, visit the web site of theFH Foundation. It's got information about how to join a clinical trial and where to find specialists. SOURCES: National Human Genome Research Institute: "Learning About Familial Hypercholesterolemia." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Familial Hypercholesterolemia." News release, FDA. Medscape reference: "Familial Hypercholesterolemia." American Liver Foundation: "Liver Transplant." FH Foundation: "About FH." Health.gov: "Choose a diet low in fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol." Can they help lower yours? What it can do for you. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.