Horner syndromeis a rare condition that causes problems on one side of your face when the nerves there are damaged. It's also called Horner-Bernard syndrome or oculosympathetic palsy. You can get Horner syndrome at any age. In rare cases -- about 1 in 6,250 births -- ababywill be born with it.   These symptoms affect youreyesor face on the same side: You also can havepainorheadaches, which happens more often in middle-aged men. Horner syndrome can be a sign of a serious health risk such asnerve damage. See your doctor if you notice any of its symptoms. Symptoms of Horner syndrome in children Children who get Horner syndrome before age 2 also can have:  In about 35% to 40% of cases, doctors aren’t sure what exactly causes Horner syndrome. Some researchers think it can be tied to your genes. Other times, it happens because of damage to a string of nerves (called a pathway) that helps control youreyes,heart rate, sweat, andblood pressure. One of three pathways may be involved in Horner syndrome: First order (central) This pathway involves the nerves that run from the hypothalamus in your brain to your chest, through your brain stem and spinal cord. Conditions that can affect it include: Second order (preganglionic) These nerves go from your chest to the top of your lungs and along the carotid artery in your neck. They might be affected by: Third order (postganglionic) This path runs from your neck to your middle ear and eye. Things that can affect it include: Neck or shoulder injuries during birth can cause Horner syndrome in some babies, but it's very rare. Babies born with damage to their aorta can also have it. Andneuroblastoma, a type ofcancer, can cause it in some kids. Only 5% of people who have Horner syndrome are born with it. Your doctor or an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) can do tests to check for Horner syndrome. They’ll do aphysical examand ask about your medical history to find out if you've had any illness or injury that could have caused nerve damage. Then, they’ll put drops in youreyesto see how your pupils react. Other tests may show a growth, damage, or injury that could cause Horner syndrome. The doctor might order one or more of these: Your doctor also may want to test your blood orurineto check for any health problems that could cause nerve damage. There aren’t any treatments specifically for Horner syndrome. The best way to ease your symptoms is to treat the health problem that caused them. If you have a tumor or lesion, your doctor might remove it through surgery. You could also have radiation and chemotherapy. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: "Horner syndrome." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Horner syndrome." Genetics Home Reference: "Horner syndrome." American Academy of Ophthalmology: "Horner syndrome." National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Horner’s syndrome.” Cleveland Clinic: “Horner’s Syndrome.” Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.