A condom is a thin, fitted tube worn over the penis during sex (male condoms) or inserted into the vagina before sex (female condoms). They create a barrier that keeps semen and other body fluids out of the vagina, rectum, or mouth. You might hear a condom called a rubber or the barrier method. But, no matter what you call them, condoms have the same purpose. They preventSTDs(sexually transmitted diseases) and pregnancy. And they’re a good birth control option because they're cheap, easy to get, and you don't have to plan ahead to use them. How well a condom works depends a lot on whether you use it the right way. When used properly, male condoms are about 98% effective at preventing pregnancy. This means that in one year, 2 out of every 100 women whose partners always use condoms correctly will get pregnant. That number rises to 18 out of every 100 women whose partners don’t use the condom correctly every time. Female condoms are about 95% effective when used properly. They work only 79% of the time if you don’t use them right. Condoms also greatly lower the chances that one person will pass an STD to the other, particularly if you wear one every time you have sex. Not having sex, however, is the only way to be 100% sure you won't get a disease. Still, condoms are very effective at preventing STDs likegonorrhea, chlamydia, herpes, andHIV(the virus that causes AIDS). The exact risk varies by the type of disease. For example, condoms are almost 100% effective at protecting against HIV. But HPV, the most common sexually transmitted disease, can infect areas that a male condom doesn’t cover, like the scrotum. Condoms lower the risk of HPV infection, but they don’t get rid of it. There are many types of male condoms, including: You might also find glow-in-the-dark or other novelty condoms. But be careful: These kinds typically aren’t FDA-approved and may not prevent pregnancies or STDs. Make sure the package clearly states that the product guards against both. There’s only one type of female condom approved by the FDA for use in the U.S. It’s made of nitrile, a type of latex-free, human-made rubber. It comes pre-lubricated. If you are sexually active, keep a few condoms with you so you'll always have one when you need it. Put on a new condom every single time you have sex. Use a condom when you have vaginal, oral, oranal sex. Put on a different condom for each type of sex you have. Keep the condom on the whole time you're having sex. Don't take it off at any point. If it breaks, stop and replace it right away. Don’t use male and female condoms at the same time. One can stick to the other and pull it out of place or tear it. To use male condoms: To use female condoms: Male condoms cost up to $1 each, depending on how many you buy and where you get them.Female condomscost about $2 each. You can buy them at your local drug store or supermarket. And some health centers, family planning clinics, and schools give male and female condoms away for free. You can put a male condom on at any time before or during sex. You should insert the condom before you plan to have sex. Should I keep a condom in my wallet? No. You should be prepared, but condoms kept in warm places, like a wallet or glove compartment, can weaken from the heat. An outside coat pocket or at home in a cool, dry place are better places to keep condoms. Do condoms have expiration dates? Yes. Most condoms are good for 3 to 5 years. Check for the date printed on the box or condom wrapper. When it comes to condoms for the penis, does one size fit all? Not always. A standard size should be large enough to accommodate most penises. But some may need a larger size. It’s just as important to make sure the condom isn’t too large. There are "snug" sizes also available. SOURCES: Teens Health: “Condoms.” Columbia University: “Five kinds of condoms: A guide for consumers.” FDA: “Condoms and sexually transmitted diseases.” Virginia Tech: “Condoms and spermicides.” World Health Organization: “Nonoxynol-9 ineffective in preventing HIV infection.” Columbia University: “Do textured condoms heighten sexual pleasure?” Planned Parenthood: “Condom.” CDC: "Genital HPV infection - fact sheet," “Female Condom Use,”  "Condom Fact Sheet in Brief." Center for Young Women's Health: “Male Condoms.” American Social Health Association. Nemours Foundation: "Condom." Avert: "Using Condoms, Condom Types and Sizes." Kliegman, R.Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics, 19th ed., Saunders Elsevier, 2011. Lara-Torre, E.Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinics, March 2009. UCSF: "How do you use a condom?" Take this quiz. Here's what to expect. Here's what to do next. What you should know to prevent pregnancy. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.