If your job or favorite hobby puts strain on your hands and wrists, you might wonder if you havecarpal tunnel syndrome. Maybe you’ve got some symptoms, like tingling or numbness in your fingers, and you want to make sure it doesn’t get worse. The good news is that there’s a lot you can do to protect yourself and prevent your symptoms from getting worse. Carpal tunnel syndromeis caused by pressure on your median nerve. This nerve gives you feeling in your thumb and all your fingers except your pinky. When the median nerve goes through your wrist, it passes through a narrow path -- the carpal tunnel -- that’s made of bone and ligament. If you get any swelling in your wrist, this tunnel gets squeezed and pinches your median nerve, which causes your symptoms. There’s no one, surefire way to prevent carpal tunnel syndrome. But if youreduce stressand strain on your hands and wrists as much as you can, you may keep it from getting worse. Often in our daily routines, we get so used to doing things a certain way that we don’t even think about it. Many times, you may use more force than you need to get the job done. For instance, you might grip your tools too tightly when a firm hold is plenty. Or you may pound your computer keyboard when gentle keystrokes will do. As you go through your day, keep an eye on how tense your hands are and how much pressure you put on them. If you can back off even a little, your hands and wrists will thank you. Step away from your work to bend or stretch your hands. A 10- to 15-minute break every hour is ideal. This is especially important if you use tools that vibrate or make you apply a lot of force. When you take those breaks (or any time throughout the day), try this simple stretch: Or this one: If you can, avoid bending your wrist all the way up or down. When you keep your wrist in a straight, neutral position, it takes the pressure off your median nerve. Wearing a wrist brace when yousleepcan help you do this. It might also help to wear it during activities that trigger your symptoms. Try to avoid doing the same hand and wrist motions over and over again. For example, if you have a task that you always do with your right hand, do it with your left instead. Or, mix up your tasks as much as you can to give your muscles a break. While it’s natural to focus on your wrist and hands, how you hold the rest of your body can also make a difference. Poor posture may cause you to roll your shoulders forward. This sets off a chain reaction that shortens your neck andshouldermuscles, crunches the nerves in your neck, and makes wrist problems worse. It sounds simple, but it makes a difference. When you’re cold, pain and stiffness get worse. Even gloves with no fingers can be helpful because they keep your hands and wrists warm and loose. If your work triggers your symptoms, ask you manager about changing up your work space. You may be able to alter anything from your workstation setup to tool handles to how tasks get done to see if it helps your symptoms. You might also be able to trade off with co-workers so you can avoid the same task over and over. If you work at a computer, try these things: This medical professional may be able to: SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons, OrthInfo: “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.” NIH, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Strokes: “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Fact Sheet.” Mayo Clinic: “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.” Office on Women’s Health: “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Fact Sheet.” Arthritis Foundation: “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome Relief.” University of Washington Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine: “Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.” Learn common causes of arm pain. How to protect your hands and wrists. See different types and how they work. Common conditions and how to treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.