Doctors use many different tests to confirm that you or a loved one hascystic fibrosis(CF). These include tests that check yourbloodand sweat, and sometimes your stool. Your symptoms will also need to be reviewed by a doctor who specializes in this genetic disease. There are a number of ways to diagnose CF. This article examines the most common. All 50 states and the District of Columbia screen babies for severe health conditions such as CF. This is often done with abloodtest a few days after birth. A doctor or nurse will draw a few drops of blood from yourbaby’s heel and send the sample to a lab. There, it’s checked for a chemical made by thepancreascalled immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT). The IRT-based test is just a screening test -- it’s not meant to make a diagnosis. Most babies who “fail” the IRT screen don’t have cystic fibrosis -- they just have a higher risk and need another test to confirm. If results from the second test are normal, there’s no further risk or need for more testing. A “sweat test” is thought to be the most reliable way to tell if someone has CF. It checks the amount of salt in your sweat. People with CF have higher levels of chloride, a compound in salt. This test can be done on people of any age. But some babies might not sweat enough and may need to be tested more than once. To do it, a doctor rubs a small area of theskinon your arm with a special gel that activates the sweat glands. They’ll use a weak electrical current to push this medicine into the skin. It doesn’t hurt, but may cause a tingling, warm feeling. Sweat will collect for 30 minutes in a special sweat collection device that is attached to your arm, and then the sample will be sent to a lab. High amounts of salt will confirm CF. Cystic fibrosis is caused by a faulty gene that’s passed down from both parents. You can carry this gene without having symptoms. But if you and your partner are both carriers, there’s a risk that yourbabywill be born with CF. If you’re thinking aboutstarting a family, your DNA can be checked to see if you have this gene. To do this, your doctor will take a sample of your blood or swab the inside of your cheek to get a sample of cells. You may want this test if: Agenetic counselor-- someone who is trained in diseases that run in families -- can explain your results to you. They can also help explain your options if your results show that you’re a carrier. “Carrier testing” is also offered to newlypregnantwomen and their partners. If the results show that you both have the CF gene, then you may decide to have further testing to check the health of yourfetus. This can be done by: Amniocentesis:Your doctor checks theamniotic fluid(which surrounds yourbabyin the womb) for any signs ofbirth defects. This is often done between the 15thand 20thweek of pregnancy. Chorionic villus sampling(CVS):A sample of tissue from theplacentacan also be checked for the faulty CF gene. You can have this done between your 10thand 12th week of pregnancy. If your doctor thinks you might have CF and you weren’t tested at birth, they may suggest that you have both a genetic test and a sweat test. Repeated bouts ofpancreatitis(inflamedpancreas),nasal polyps, or frequentsinusandlunginfections, are some things that may trigger your doctor’s concern. SOURCES: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “How is Cystic Fibrosis Diagnosed?” Mayo Clinic: “Cystic Fibrosis.” Cystic Fibrosis Foundation: “Newborn Screening for CF,” “Testing for CF,” Sweat Test.” KidsHealth: “Cystic Fibrosis (CF) Chloride Sweat Test.” March of Dimes: “Cystic fibrosis and pregnancy.” NHS: “Causes of Cystic Fibrosis,” “Diagnosing Cystic Fibrosis.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.