Hunter syndrome, also called mucopolysaccharidosis II or MPS II, is a rare disease that's passed on in families. It mainly affects boys. Their bodies can't break down a kind of sugar that builds bones,skin, tendons, and other tissue. Those sugars build up in their cells and damage many parts of the body, including thebrain. Exactly what happens is different for every person. When your son has Hunter syndrome, there are things you can do to help them play, have friends, and do some of the things that other kids do, even though they may look different from their pals. Although there is no cure for Hunter syndrome, there are ways to help manage it and live with the symptoms. Boys with the disease can't make a certain protein because there's a problem with a small piece of their DNA, called a gene, that comes from their mother. A dad with Hunter syndrome will pass the problem gene to their daughter, but the daughter won't get the disease unless they get the gene from their mom, too. It's possible -- but very, very unlikely -- that someone could develop Hunter syndrome even though no one in their family going back has had it. When Hunter syndrome affects thebrain, which is about 75% of the time, symptoms usually show up between 18 months and 4 years of age. They start about 2 years later when the disease is milder. Hunter syndrome usually affects how the boy looks: They'll probably have these symptoms: When a boy'sbrainis affected, it's likely they'll have: Kids who have Hunter syndrome are usually cheerful and affectionate, despite the problems it can cause. Doctors often have to rule out other medical conditions first. Your doctor may ask: If the doctors can't find another explanation for your son's symptoms, they'll test for Hunter syndrome by checking for: After doctors are sure it's Hunter syndrome, it's a good idea to let extended family members know about the gene problem, too. If you're a pregnant woman and you know you carry the gene or you already have a child with Hunter syndrome, you can find out whether the baby you're carrying is affected. Talk to your doctor about testing early in your pregnancy. Early treatment may prevent some long-term damage. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) can help slow the disease for boys with milder Hunter syndrome. It replaces the protein their body doesn't make. ERT can help improve: ERT is the first treatment for kids whose brains aren't affected. It doesn't slow the disease in thebrain. Bone marrow and umbilical cordbloodtransplants. These transplants bring cells into your child's body that can hopefully make the protein they're missing. The new cells come from either a bone marrow donor whose cells match your child's or thestem cellsof umbilical cordbloodfrom newborn babies. Both of these treatments are high-risk. They're usually used only if other treatments aren't possible. They also haven't been shown to help when thebrainis affected. Research is under way to find effective treatments for boys with severe Hunter syndrome. Treating the symptoms.Because so many different parts of your child's body can be affected, you'll probably need to see several doctors to help you manage the condition, including: Medicationor surgery can ease some of the complications.Physical therapycan help with joint and movement issues. And occupational therapy can help you make changes at home and school to make it easier to get around and do things.Medicationslikemelatoninmay help with sleep. Focus on keeping your son healthy and giving them the chance to live a meaningful, rewarding life. Include them in family activities whenever it's safe. Set the tone for others. Be positive. Keep an open mind about other people; they may not know what to say so they don't pry or offend or embarrass you. When someone asks about them, be matter-of-fact about their condition. Talk about them as a person -- their interests, their curiosity, and their sunny personality, too. Let them know what their needs as well as their abilities are, and how they can help, if that's appropriate. Activity. Startstretchingand range-of-motion exercises early to keep their joints flexible. Ask your physical therapist about ways to make exercises part of play. Choose large toys that are easy to grab and hold on to, that won't be damaged by chewing. Encourage friendships. Talk to other kids (or their parents) about how to interact with your son. Walk up to them from the front, with hands out. Give them about an arm's length of space. It's OK to remind them to touch nice and not hit. But kids will be kids, so prepare them for stares and teasing with role-play and humor. Extra help for learning. Help them learn as much as they can while their brain is working well. If they go to school, work with the staff to come up with anindividualized education program(IEP) for them. They may be eligible for one-on-one attention in the classroom or help for other issues, like hearing problems. Take care of yourself, too. You'll do a better job caring for your child when you have people you can turn to to help out with caregiving tasks. Step back, and take a break to rest and recharge. Spend time nurturing your relationship with yourself and others you love. Remember, the whole family is affected by this disease. A counselor can help sort out feelings. Some boys with less severe Hunter syndrome grow up and live long lives. They'll go through puberty like other teens and can have children. Butheart diseaseand trouble breathing can still cause problems for them. Kids with severe Hunter syndrome are less likely to reach adulthood. Their brains will slowly stop working, and eventually they'll need special care to make them comfortable. Parents of other Hunter syndrome boys are a great resource for understanding what's going on, sharing your feelings, and getting ideas for how to live with the condition. You can find ways to enjoy the time that you have with your child. The National MPS Societyhas more information about this disease. They can also help you connect with other families who are facing the same challenges. If you are interested in more advanced reading on this topic, we’ve made content from our health professional site, Medscape, available to you on WebMD. Learn More SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: "Multidisciplinary Management of Hunter Syndrome." Mucopolysaccharide & Related Diseases Society Australia: "A Guide to Understanding Hunter Syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type II; MPS II)." National MPS Society: "MPS II;" "Daily Living with MPS and Related Diseases;" and "A Guide to Understanding MPS II." NIH National Library of Medicine: "Mucopolysaccharidosis type II." Wraith, J.European Journal of Pediatrics, March 2008. Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.