Pigmentation is the coloring of a person'sskin. When a person is healthy, their skin color will appear normal. In the case of illness or injury, the person's skin may change color, becoming darker (hyperpigmentation) or lighter (hypopigmentation). Hyperpigmentation in skin is caused by an increase in melanin, the substance in the body that is responsible for color (pigment). Certain conditions, such as pregnancy orAddison's disease(decreased function of the adrenal gland), may cause a greater production of melanin and hyperpigmentation. Exposure to sunlight is a major cause of hyperpigmentation, and will darken already hyperpigmented areas. Hyperpigmentation can also be caused by various drugs, including someantibiotics, antiarrhythmics, and antimalarial drugs. An example of hyperpigmentation is melasma. This condition is characterized by tan or brown patches, most commonly on the face. Melasma can occur in pregnant women and is often called the "mask of pregnancy;" however, men can also develop this condition. Melasma sometimes goes away after pregnancy. It can also be treated with certain prescription creams (such ashydroquinone). If you have melasma, try to limit your exposure to daylight. Wear a broad-brimmed hat and use asunscreenwith an SPF of 30 or higher at all times, because sunlight will worsen your condition. Sunscreens containing the physical blockers zinc oxide ortitanium dioxideare also helpful in blocking daylight’s UVA rays, which makes hyperpigmentation worse. People with darker skin are at higher risk for melasma. It will look like dark brown or greyish brown patches on darker skin. Consult with your doctor before treating the condition yourself. Hypopigmentation in skin is the result of a reduction in melanin production. Examples of hypopigmentation include: SOURCES: Photo Credit: yuuurin / Getty Images Merck Manual Home Health Handbook: "Overview of Skin Pigment." American Osteopathic College of Dermatology: "Hyperpigmentation." American Academy of Dermatology: "Melasma." National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: "Healthy Skin Matters." FDA. Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.