High blood pressure (hypertension) is a leading cause ofkidney diseaseand kidney failure (end-stage renal disease). Kidney disease can also cause a type of high blood pressure called renal hypertension. Hypertension can cause damage to thebloodvessels and filters in thekidney, making removal of waste from the body difficult. Once a person is diagnosed with end-stage renal disease,dialysis—ablood-cleansing process—orkidneytransplantation is necessary. The symptoms of kidney disease include: As withhigh blood pressure, you may not realize that you have kidney disease. Certain laboratory tests can indicate whether your kidneys are eliminating waste products properly. These tests include serumcreatinineand blood urea nitrogen; elevated levels of either can indicate kidney damage.Proteinuria, an excess of protein in the urine, is also a sign of kidney disease. Kidney disease caused by high blood pressure affects every group and race. However, certain groups are at higher risk, including: To prevent kidney damage from high blood pressure: For patients who have high blood pressure and kidney disease, the most important treatment is to control their blood pressure through lifestyle changes. Drugs can lower blood pressure and protect the kidneys from further damage, especially in people with diabetes. However, treatments need to be individualized. The most important blood pressure medications to treat renal hypertension include: Although hypertension is a leading cause of kidney disease, there is a type of hypertension that is actually causedbykidney disease.Renal hypertension, also called renovascular hypertension, is elevatedblood pressurecaused bykidney disease. It can usually be controlled by the sameblood pressure drugs. Some people with renal hypertension can be helped byangioplasty, stenting, or surgery on thebloodvessels of thekidney. Renal hypertension is caused by a narrowing in thearteriesthat deliverbloodto the kidney. One or bothkidneys' arteries may be narrowed. This condition is calledrenal artery stenosis. When the kidneys receive low blood flow, they act as if the low flow is owing todehydration,so they respond by releasing hormones that stimulate the body to retain sodium and water. Blood vessels fill with additional fluid, and blood pressure goes up. The narrowing in one or both renal arteries is most often caused byatherosclerosis(hardening of the arteries). This is the same process that leads to manyheart attacksand strokes. A less common cause of the narrowing is fibromuscular dysplasia. This is a condition in which the structure of the renal arteries develops abnormally for unclear reasons. Renal hypertension usually causes no symptoms. The narrowing in the arteries can't be felt. Unless it's dangerously high,high blood pressure causesno symptoms either. Symptoms of severely elevated blood pressure include: The vast majority of people with renalhypertensionnever experience these (or any) symptoms.High blood pressureis dangerous, partly because there are no symptoms, so organ damage can occur slowly without being recognized. For most people with renal hypertension due to renal artery narrowing, medications can effectively control blood pressure. However, more than one blood pressure drug is often needed. In some people with renal hypertension due to narrowing of the renal artery, even taking three or more medications every day may not adequately control blood pressure. In these situations, a procedure to improve blood flow to the kidneys may help. Possible procedures include: Angioplasty. A doctor threads a catheter through a large artery in the groin and advances it into the renal artery. A balloon is then inflated for a few moments. This widens the artery and improves blood flow. Stenting. During angioplasty, a wire-meshstentcan be expanded inside the renal artery. The stent stays in place. This keeps the artery open after the balloon is removed. Research, however, has not shown that stenting is more effective than medication for most people with renal hypertension. Surgery. A surgeon can bypass the narrowed renal artery by sewing a healthy blood vessel next to it. Surgery is generally considered only when angioplasty and stenting are not possible and is only rarely performed. These procedures are similar to those used to improve blood flow in theheartin people withcoronary artery disease. Photo credit: magicmine/Getty Images SOURCES: National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse, National Institutes of Health. Brenner, B.Brenner & Rector's The Kidney.8th Edition,Philadelphia:Saunders Elsevier, 2007. Safian, R.New England Journal of Medicine, 2001. Hirsch, A.Circulation, 2006. Dworkin, L.New England Journal of Medicine, 2009. Balk, E.Annals of Internal Medicine,2006. Wheatley, K.New England Journal of Medicine. Allen-Dicker, J.New England Journal of Medicine,2014. These 13 foods can help get your numbers in check. Simple upgrades to your daily routine can make a difference. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.