Hypovolemic shock is a dangerous condition that happens when you suddenly lose a lot of blood or fluids from your body. This drops your blood volume, the amount ofbloodcirculating in your body. That’s why it’s also known as low-volume shock. Hypovolemic shock is a life-threatening emergency. Blood helps hold your body temperature steady, formsblood clots, and moves oxygen and nutrients to all of your cells. If your blood volume gets too low, your organs won't be able to keep working. The most common cause of hypovolemic shock is blood loss when a major blood vessel bursts or when you’re seriously injured. This is called hemorrhagic shock. You can also get it from heavy bleeding related topregnancy, fromburns, or even from severevomitinganddiarrhea. How hypovolemic shock shows up can depend on a number of things, including: With an injury, the most obvious sign of hypovolemic shock is a lot of bleeding. But you won't see it when the bleeding is happening inside your body because of anaortic aneurysm, organ damage, orectopic pregnancy. Other signs of hypovolemic shock include: Causes of hypovolemic shock that involve bleeding include: Causes that don’t involve bleeding include: There are four stages of hypovolemic shock: Your doctor will check your temperature, pulse, breathing, and blood pressure. They'll check the color and feel of your skin. If you're awake and alert, they'll ask about past medical issues and your overall health. If you could be in shock because of an ectopic pregnancy or something else related to your reproductive organs, the health care team will also do apregnancy testand ask about your last menstrual period and any recentvaginal bleeding. You may need more tests, including: The first step is to get you to the emergency room as quickly as possible. Along the way, someone should try to stop any visible bleeding. Your medical team will try to: You’ll get fluids through an IV, a bag of liquid attached to a needle that goes directly into a vein. Most people who lose more than 30% of their blood volume will also need ablood transfusion. Many will need some kind of surgery, especially if they have internal or gynecological bleeding. Hypovolemic shock can lead to complications such as: The outcome depends on how serious your condition is when you start treatment, how much blood you lost, how quickly blood and fluids are replaced, and whether you have any other issues or complications. SOURCES: Medscape: "Hypovolemic Shock." American Society of Hematology: "Blood basics." Fleisher, G.Textbook of Pediatric Emergency Medicine, Edition 6, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2010. Kollef, M.The Washington Manual of Critical Care, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2008. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: "ACOG Practice Bulletin 183: Postpartum Hemorrhage." Mayo Clinic: "Placental abruption: Complications," "Ectopic pregnancy: Definition," "Burns: Complications," "Dehydration: Overview." Critical Care: "Clinical review: Hemorrhagic Shock." CDC: "National Center for Health Statistics: Body Measurements." Open Anesthesia.org: "Maximum ABL calculation." MedGen: “Hypovolemic shock.” Journal of Minimally Invasive Gynecology: “A very rare case of endometriosis presenting with massive hemoperitoneum.” StatPearls: “Hypovolemic shock.” American College of Surgeons Medical Student Core Curriculum: “Shock.” Merck Manual Professional Version: “Shock.” Parrillo, J.Current Therapy in Critical Care Medicine, Mosby, 1997. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.