If you havehypokalemia, that means you have low levels ofpotassiumin yourblood. Potassium is a mineral your body needs to work normally. It helps muscles to move, cells to get thenutrientsthey need, and nerves to send their signals. It’s especially important for cells in yourheart. It also helps keep yourblood pressurefrom getting too high. There are many different reasons you could have low potassium levels. It may be because too much potassium is leaving through your digestive tract. It’s usually a symptom of another problem. Most commonly, you get hypokalemia when: It’s possible, but rare, to get hypokalemia from having too little potassium in your diet. Other things sometimes cause it, too, like: Several syndromes can be associated with low potassium, such as: Women tend to get hypokalemia more often than men. If your problem is temporary, or you’re only slightly hypokalemic, you might not feel any symptoms. Once your potassium levels fall below a certain level, you might experience: Hypokalemia can affect yourkidneys. You may have to go to the bathroom more often. You may also feel thirsty. You may notice muscle problems duringexercise. In severe cases, muscle weakness can lead to paralysis and possibly respiratory failure. You will need a blood test for your doctor to find out if you have hypokalemia. They will ask you about your health history. They’ll want to know if you’ve had any illness that involvedvomitingor diarrhea. They’ll ask about any conditions you might have that could be causing it. You may take aurine testso your doctor can find out if you’re losing potassium when you pee. Since low potassium sometimes can affect your blood pressure, your doctor will check that, too. They also may want to do anelectrocardiogram(EKG) if they think you may have arrhythmia. This is one of the more serious side effects, and might change the way your doctor chooses to treat the problem. You can get more potassium by takingsupplements. Most of these you can take bymouth. In some cases it’s necessary to get your potassium injected by IV. For example: When your hypokalemia is a result of another medical condition, your doctor will help you treat that. If you have low potassium because of diuretics, they may take you off them. Sometimes that makes the condition go away. Always check with your doctor before you stop any medicine. Also, ask them before you take any potassiumsupplements. This might cause too much potassium to build up in your system, which could lead tohyperkalemia. SOURCES: MedlinePlus: “Potassium.” Cleveland Clinic: “Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia.” Medscape: “Hypokalemia.” Mayo Clinic: “Low potassium (hypokalemia).” Merck Manual: “Hypokalemia (Low Level of Potassium in the Blood).” UpToDate: “Clinical manifestations and treatment of hypokalemia in adults.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Hypokalemia.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.