Hypothyroidism, also called underactive thyroid disease, is a common disorder. With hypothyroidism, your thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormone. Thethyroidgland is located in the front lower part of your neck. Hormones released by the gland travel through your bloodstream and affect nearly every part of your body, from yourheartandbrain, to your muscles andskin.   The thyroid controls how your body's cells use energy from food, a process called metabolism. Among other things, your metabolism affects your body’s temperature, your heartbeat, and how well you burn calories. If you don't have enough thyroid hormone, your body processes slow down. That means your body makes less energy, and your metabolism becomes sluggish. Symptoms of hypothyroidism may be vague and can often mimic other conditions. They may include: Babies with hypothyroidism may have no symptoms. If symptoms do occur, they can include: Make an appointment with your health care provider if you or your baby has any of these symptoms. It’s important to note that these symptoms can be due to other medical conditions. Children and teens may also have hypothyroidism with the signs and symptoms seen in adults. Kids and teens may also have: The most common cause of hypothyroidism isHashimoto's thyroiditis. "Thyroiditis" is aninflammationof the thyroid gland. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is an autoimmune disorder. With Hashimoto’s, your body produces antibodies that attack and destroy the thyroid gland. Thyroiditis may also be caused by a viral infection. Other causes of hypothyroidism include: Primary hypothyroidism is caused by a problem with the thyroid gland itself. Secondary hypothyroidism occurs when another problem interferes with the thyroid's ability to produce hormones. For example, the pituitary gland or hypothalamus produce hormones that trigger the release of thyroid hormone. A problem with one of these glands can make your thyroid underactive. Sometimes, an underactive thyroid that results from a problem with the hypothalamus is called tertiary hypothyroidism. Women, particularly older women, are more likely to develop hypothyroidism than men. You are also more likely to develop hypothyroidism if you have a close family member with anautoimmune disease. Other risk factors include: If you have symptoms of hypothyroidism, your doctor will order blood tests to check hormone levels. These may include: Lower-than-normal T4 levels usually mean you have hypothyroidism. However, some people may have increased TSH levels while having normal T4 levels. This is called subclinical (mild) hypothyroidism. It is believed to be an early stage of hypothyroidism. If your test results or physical exam of the thyroid are abnormal, your doctor may order athyroid ultrasound, or thyroid scan, to check for nodules or inflammation. If you have hypothyroidism, your doctor will prescribe a synthetic (human-made) thyroid hormone T4. You take this pill every day. Certain other medications can interfere with how your body absorbs synthetic thyroid hormone. Make sure your doctor knows about all the medicines, herbs, andsupplementsyou take, including over-the-counter products. You will need regular blood tests to check your thyroid hormone levels. Your doctor may need to adjust your medication dose from time to time. It may take a little time to figure out the correct dosage of thyroid hormone that you need. Your doctor will give you a blood test to check your TSH levels 6 to 8 weeks after you start taking synthetic hormones, and then once every 6 months. If your dosage is too high and you get too much hormone, you could have these side effects: People with severe hypothyroidism orheart diseasemay start out with a low dose of synthetic hormone, and then gradually increase the amount so their heart can adjust to it. Once you have the correct dosage, you shouldn’t have any side effects from your hormones. But don’t stop or skip your medication, because your hypothyroidism symptoms could come back. If you gain or lose even as much as 10 pounds of body weight, you may need to get your TSH levels checked again to see if your hormone dosage should be adjusted. Untreated, hypothyroidism may cause complications, such as: Thyroid problemsin a pregnant woman can affect the developing baby. During the first three months of pregnancy, the baby receives all thyroid hormone from its mother. If the mother has hypothyroidism, the baby does not get enough thyroid hormone. This can lead to problems with mental development. Extremely low levels of thyroid hormone can cause a life-threatening condition called myxedema. Myxedema is the most severe form of hypothyroidism. A person with myxedema can lose consciousness or go into a coma. The condition can also cause the body temperature to drop very low, which can cause death. SOURCES: The Hormone Foundation: "Thyroid Problems." Family Doctor: "Hypothyroidism." MedlinePlus: "Thyroid Diseases." National Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases Information Service: "Hypothyroidism." American Thyroid Association: "Hypothyroidism Web Booklet,” “Hypothyroidism (Underactive).” WomensHealth.gov: "Thyroid disease." Mayo Clinic: “Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid).” Harvard Medical School: “The lowdown on thyroid slowdown.” Muscles, Ligaments, and Tendons Journal: “Thyroid hormones and tendon: Current views and future perspectives. Concise review.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.