Your neck has four pea-sized glands called the parathyroid glands. Hyperparathyroidism happens when they don't make enoughparathyroid hormone(PTH), are surgically removed, are damaged or when your body is resistant to that hormone. PTH controls the blood level of important vitamins and minerals such as vitamin D andcalcium. You may also havehypoparathyroidismbecause you have another condition that affects how much PTH is in your body, such as a low magnesium level. Your body usescalciumto keep your nerves, muscles, andheartworking. Low levels ofcalciumcan result in symptoms ranging from mild to severemuscle spasms, tingling, heart problems, andseizures. The good news is you can treat the condition. Treatment mostly means making sure your body has enough calcium and vitamin D, which you can do by eating abalanced diet, taking supplements, and keeping an eye on blood levels. If you stick with your treatment plan and see your doctor regularly, you can lead a full, active life with hypoparathyroidism. Several things can trigger hypoparathyroidism. They include: Some of the symptoms of low blood calcium are: Low calcium in the long term can lead to: Your doctor will test your blood and your urine for calcium, PTH, phosphorus, and magnesium. If your child has the disease, ask their doctor how you can make sure they get thenutrientsthey need to grow. Calcium andvitamin Dsupplementscan keep hypoparathyroidism in check. A healthy diet helps, too. Your doctor may tell you to: A dietitian can help you plan meals to keep you or your child healthy. Your child's doctor will check them regularly to see that their growth is on track. If normal calcium levels in your body are hard to maintain, you may need to get an injection of PTH. Once your calcium levels are normal again, you can go back to your regular treatment. You can take steps to make living with hypoparathyroidism easier. As long as you get enough calcium andvitamin Dand have your blood checked regularly, you should be able to keep your hypoparathyroidism under control. If you don't take your daily supplement and watch your diet, the condition can be dangerous. For more information, visit the web site of theHypoparathyroidism Association. SOURCES: Hormone Health Network: "Hypoparathyroidism." Hypopara UK: "Hypoparathyroidism." Hypoparathyroidism Association: "A Quick Guide to Understanding Hypoparathyroidism." Medscape: "Hypoparathyroidism." National Osteoporosis Foundation: "A Guide to Calcium-Rich Foods." NIH Office of Rare Disease Research: "Hypoparathyroidism." Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.