Kids catch lots of bugs in their first few years of life.Coldsand other respiratory infections are common. But kids can get urinary tract infections (UTIs), too. Up to 8% of girls and 2% of boys will get aUTIby age 5. Sometimes the symptoms of this infection can be hard to spot in kids. It's important to get your child treated, because aUTIcan turn into a more seriouskidney infection. With the right treatment, your child should start to feel better in just a few days. It happens when bacteria from theirskinorpoopget into the urinary tract and multiply. These nasty germs can cause infections anywhere in the urinary tract, which is made up of the: Abladder infectionis called cystitis. A kidney infection is called pyelonephritis. Girls are more likely to get UTIs than boys are because their urethra is shorter. Bacteria from theanuscan more easily get into thevaginaand urethra. Some kids have a problem with their bladder or kidneys that makes them more likely to get UTIs. Narrowing in the urinary tract can block urine flow and allow germs to multiply. A condition called vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) can cause urine to back up from the bladder into the ureters and kidneys. In older kids, the symptoms are often clear. The main symptoms arepainin the lower belly, back, or side or while peeing, and an urgent need to pee or pee more often. Some kids who already have been toilet trained lose control over their bladder and may wet the bed. You may even see drops of blood in the urine, and/or the urine is pink. With younger children, you might need to do a little digging to find out what's wrong. Infants can have more general symptoms, like fussiness, little interest in food, or afever. Other symptoms of a UTI include: If your child has symptoms of a UTI, see your pediatrician. The doctor will take a urine sample and test it for blood, white blood cells, and other signs of infection. They can collect urine in a number of ways: Rapid tests can be conducted to help your doctor find the exact germs that caused your child’s UTI so they’ll know the right type of medicine to prescribe to kill them. If your child has had a few UTIs, your doctor might refer you to a nephrologist (kidney specialist) and do one or more of these imaging tests to look for problems in the urinary tract: Antibiotics, mainly. Thesemedicationskill bacteria. Kids usually take them for anywhere from 3 to 10 days (most commonly 7-10 days). Your doctor might do anotherurine testafter your child finishes the medicine to see if the infection has cleared up. Make sure your child finishes all of their meds, even if they start to feel better. Stopping too soon can make germs resistant to antibiotics and cause another infection. Most UTIs clear up in about a week. Some kids will have symptoms for a few weeks. Call your doctor if your child's symptoms don't start to improve after 3 days from when they started on antibiotics, or if they get worse. Change your baby's diapers often to prevent bacteria from growing. As your child gets older, teach them good bathroom habits to prevent UTIs. Instruct girls to wipe from front to back. This helps to prevent bacteria in poop from getting into thevaginaand urinary tract. Encourage your kids to go to the bathroom as soon as they feel the urge -- not to hold it in. Girls should avoid bubble baths and should not use perfumed soaps. And, they should wear cotton underwear -- not nylon -- to improve airflow and prevent bacteria from growing. Have your kids drink lots ofwater, which helps flush bacteria out of the urinary tract. Extra water also preventsconstipation, which can create blockages in the urinary tract that allow bacteria to grow. SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: "Urinary Tract Infections (UTIs) In Children." Nemours Foundation: "Urinary Tract Infections." Urology Care Foundation: "After Treatment," "How are UTIs Diagnosed in Children?" "How Are UTIs Treated in Children?" "What Are the Signs of UTIs in Children?" "What Causes UTIs in Children?" "What is a Urinary Tract Infection (UTI) in Children?" Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.