IgA nephropathy is akidneydisorder caused by immunecomplexes andthe protein immunoglobulin A (IgA) inside the glomeruli (filters) within thekidney.IgA nephropathy affects how blood is filtered in the small blood vessels of the kidneys. It occurs when these complexes damage the filtering unit (glomerulus) inside the kidneys. These glomeruli (the singular form is glomerulus), normally filter wastes and excess water from thebloodand send them to thebladderas urine.The deposits of the IgA protein complex cause inflammation and damage that prevents this filtering process,leading tobloodand protein in the urine, swelling in the hands and feet,high blood pressure, and progressive kidney disease. This chronic kidney disease may progress over a period of 10 to 20 years. If this disorder leads to end-stage renal disease, the patient must go ondialysisor receive a kidney transplant.Risk factors such as high blood pressure or smoking contribute to disease progression, through injury to the blood vessels within the kidneys. The IgA protein is a normal part of the body's immune system.We do not know exactly what triggers the immune system to cause  IgA deposits and other immune protein complexes in the glomeruli. But, since IgA nephropathy may run in families, genetic and environmental factors probably contribute to developing the disease. Kidney diseaseusually cannot be cured. Once the tiny filtering units are damaged, they cannot be repaired. Treatment that focuses on slowing the progression of the disease and preventing complications is critical. One complication is high blood pressure, which further damages glomeruli. Some patients may benefit from limiting protein in their diet to reduce the buildup of waste in the blood.Other lifestyle changes should include managing high blood pressure. Having excess weight or obesity may contribute to the loss of protein and kidney damage. Losing excess weight may help reduce proteinuria in IgAN. Smoking cessation should also be advised. Medications are available to help reduce damage to the kidney and disease progression. These include steroids and other immunosuppressant or biologic drugs. American Kidney Fund6110 Executive BoulevardRockville, MD 20852800-638-8299 IgA Nephropathy Support Network964 Brown AvenueHuntington Valley, PA 19006215-663-0536 NationalHeart,Lung, and Blood Institute Information CenterP.O. Box 30105Bethesda, MD 20824-0105[email protected]301-592-8573 National Kidney Foundation30 East 33rd StreetNew York, NY 10016800-622-9010 Physicians and patients interested in aplacebo-controlled, multi-center trial evaluating alternate-dayprednisoneandfish oilsupplementsin young patients with IgA nephropathy should call the Central Office of the Southwest Pediatric Nephrology Group at 1-800-345-IGAN. "The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases of The National Institutes of Health. Publication: IgA Nephropathy. February 3, 1998. Last revised June 24, 1999. (Online) https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health/kidney/summary/iganeph/iganeph.htm" © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.