One of the risk factors for colorectalcanceris afamily historyof the disease. Colorectal cancer is called "hereditary" or "inherited" when several generations of a family have it. Experts have found gene changes (also known as mutations or abnormalities) thatcause colorectal cancer. A gene is a block of DNA that holds the genetic code, or instructions, for making proteins vital to our bodily functions. The children of people who carry these genes have a 50% chance of getting them from their parents. The two most common inherited colorectal cancer syndromes are hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) andfamilial adenomatous polyposis(FAP). These two account for less than 5% of all colorectal cancers. HNPCC, also known as Lynch syndrome, is the most common form of hereditarycolon cancer, accounting for about 3% of all colorectal cancer diagnoses each year. People with HNPCC often have at least three family members and two generations with colorectal cancer, and cancer develops before age 50. Although not everyone who inherits the HNPCC gene will get colorectal cancer, the risk is very high: about 80%. People with HNPCC also have a higher risk of other Lynch syndrome-related cancers, including brain, kidney, ovarian, uterine, bladder, pancreatic, small intestine, andstomach cancers. Doctors can check the pattern of colorectal cancer in relatives in order to find out if the family has HNPCC. "HNPCC families" must show certain signs of a pattern of colon cancer across generations. These are called the Amsterdam Criteria and include: Check with your doctor if you think this applies to your family. Colonoscopies are recommended in family members who are 10 years younger than the youngest family member who was diagnosed with cancer. You should also be screened for other Lynch syndrome-related cancers. For people with a diagnosis of Lynch syndrome, screening usually starts between ages 20 and 25. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is a rare condition marked by the presence of hundreds or thousands of benign polyps, noncancerous growths in the large intestine and upper respiratory tract. It’s thought to happen in about 1% of all people diagnosed with colorectal cancer each year. The polyps start early, with 95% of people with FAP getting them by age 35, and are often found in patients in theirteens, with 50% having polyps by age 15. Withoutcolonremoval, there is almost a 100% chance that some of the polyps will become cancer, usually by age 40.Thyroid canceris also linked with FAP. Although most cases of FAP are inherited, nearly a third are the result of a spontaneous (newly occurring) gene change. For people who develop a new gene mutation, they might pass the FAP gene on to their children. Genes are tiny segments of DNA that control how cells function, such as telling them when to divide and grow. One copy of each gene comes from your mother; the other comes from your father. In 1991, researchers identified the gene called APC that is responsible for the condition. It can be found in 82% of patients with FAP. The lifetime risk of colon cancer in people who have this gene change is close to 100%. The two main differences between FAP and HNPCC are: Other very rare forms of inherited polyposis syndromes are linked with a higher risk of colorectal cancer. These include: Jewish people who are Ashkenazi, or of Eastern European descent, are at increased risk for colorectal cancer. This is thought to be due to a variant of the APC gene that is found in 6% of this population. Ashkenazi Jews make up the majority of the Jewish population in the U.S. If you suspect that you are at higher risk for colorectal cancer, talk to your doctor. There may be a genetic test that can be performed to confirm your suspicions. Bloodtests can find the gene changes that make some people more likely to get FAP or HNPCC. You might want to considergenetic counselingand testing if: If you test positive for these gene changes, your doctor will probably recommend that you get a colonoscopy every year. This is a test that checks your colon for cancer or polyps. If you’ve already had colon cancer or polyps, your doctor may talk to you about a colectomy, which is surgery to remove your colon. Your relatives might want to considergenetic counselingand testing, too. A few medical centers across the country keep lists, or registries, of patients and their families with conditions tied to colorectal cancer like HNPCC, FAP, and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. These registries collect and manage information about family history and biological samples. The registries’ goals include: Patient care.The first step to joining a cancer registry is to talk about it with your family and sign a consent form that allows registry workers to contact your relatives and get medical records from other hospitals. This way, they can build a family tree, called a pedigree, that tells the story of cancer in your family. It’s the key to sorting out who is at risk, how strong the risk is, and what needs to be done. Registry workers coordinate testing, appointments, and treatments. They may also offer advice aboutinsuranceconcerns, payment problems, or any other issues. Any personal information that the registry gathers about you is confidential. Education.You and your family need to be aware of how this condition will affect your lives. You can keep up with developments through booklets, newsletters, and articles from medical journals. Registries also take part in programs to educate doctors about the complexities of inherited colorectal cancer. Research.You and your family may be asked to take part in research projects aimed at improving care for colorectal cancer patients and their families. Registries lead the way in this research because they have access to large numbers of people. Safeguards built into the research process protect you from harm. Registries and their workers can also share ideas and collaborate on studies with other registries around the world. Colorectal cancer registries also: Anyone with a strong family history of colorectal cancer (more than two close relatives with the disease) may join an inherited cancer registry. Talk to your cancer team if you’re interested. They can help you find one that’s right for you. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic. The American Journal of Pathology: "Familial Adenomatous Polyposis-Associated Thyroid Cancer." American Cancer Society. CDC. American College of Surgeons: “Colectomy.” National Cancer Institute: “Genetic Testing for Hereditary Cancer Syndromes,” "About Colon Cancer Family Registries." The age people should begin getting routine screenings. What to expect when the cancer spreads to other areas. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.