Interstitial cystitis(IC), often called painfulbladdersyndrome, is a tricky condition. It’s tough to diagnose, and though treatments can make life with it better, there’s no cure. Because IC has such a wide range of symptoms and severity, most experts think it might be several diseases. If you have urinary pain that lasts for more than 6 weeks and is not caused by other conditions like infection or kidney stones, you may have IC. No matter what it’s called, interstitial cystitis symptoms bring a lot of challenges. The disease can affect your social life, exercise, sleep, and even your ability to work. Despite this, you can still arm yourself with facts and treatments to keep symptoms in check. IC is a chronicbladderproblem. Your bladder holds pee after yourkidneyshave filtered it but before you pee it out. This condition causes pain and pressure below your belly button. Symptoms can come and go. Or they may be constant. Interstitial cystitis causes urgent, often painful bathroom trips. You may have to pee as many as 40-60 times a day in severe cases. It can even keep you up at night. These vary from person to person with IC. They can change every day or week or linger for months or years. They might even go away without any treatment. Common symptoms: Thebladder painpeople feel with IC can range from a dull ache to piercing pain. Peeing may feel like just a little sting, or it can feel like serious burning. About 5% to 10% of people with the condition get ulcers in their bladder. Things that might make symptoms worse: As many as 90% of people with IC are women. Somewhere between about 3% to 6% of adult women have some form of IC. That’s about 3 million to 8 million American women. About 1.3% of American men also have it.  On average, people first start having problems in their 40s. The risk of getting it goes up as you get older. It’s not clear why it happens, but there are several ideas: There’s no test for interstitial cystitis. If you go to your doctor complaining about bladder pain along with frequency and the urgency to pee, the next step is to rule out what else it could be. Both men and women would first need to rule out urinary tract infections, bladder cancer, sexually transmitted diseases, andkidney stones. In women,endometriosisis another possibility. For men, IC can be mistaken for an inflamedprostateor chronic pelvic pain syndrome. These tests can rule out other conditions:  For about half the cases, interstitial cystitis goes away by itself. Among those who need treatment, most find relief and get their lives back to normal. Treatment is mainly about symptom control. It takes trial and error to find the right combination of treatments. And it usually takes weeks or months to calm the symptoms. The first stage of treatment is to try to avoid triggers and try lifestyle changes that may help ease symptoms. A lot of people find that certain foods or drinks irritate their bladders. You don’t have to cut these all out at once. Notice when your symptoms are bad and think back on if you ate or drank any of these. It may be a good idea to keep a food and symptom journal. Take note of what you have each day and how you feel. You can look back to see if there are connections. Not all of these will bother every person. Common triggers: Talk to your doctor about an elimination diet, which could help you figure out what’s affecting your bladder. If lifestyle changes aren’t enough, then try the next line of treatments:  If second-line treatments don’t work, your doctor will likely turn to the third-line treatments. They require cytoscopy, a special scope used to look at the bladder, often in an operating room under anesthesia. If you haven’t been seen by a urologist, a doctor who specializes in treating bladder problems, your doctor may refer you to one now. If lifestyle changes, medications, and the procedures mentioned above aren’t enough, and your symptoms badly affect your quality of life, an urologist may try the fourth line of treatments: When all else fails, here’s what you could try: Even if IC treatments don’t work for you, pain management using painkillers,acupuncture, or other methods can keep symptoms at bay. SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Interstitial Cystitis/Painful Bladder Syndrome.” Urology Care Foundation: “Symptoms,” Treatment,” “After Initial Treatment.” Harvard Medical School: “Diagnosing and Treating Interstitial Cystitis.” Interstitial Cystitis Association: “4 to 12 Million May Have IC.” Office on Women’s Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: “Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome fact sheet.” UpToDate: “Management of interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome.” Symptoms, causes, and treatments. Test your urine knowledge. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.