A broken nose is when a bone in your nose, usually the one over the bridge of your nose, gets cracked or broken. Also called a nasal fracture, it’s the most common type of face injury. You might not be sure if it's broken. When in doubt, see a doctor. It's better to go sooner rather than later to avoid problems. These are common symptoms of a nasal fracture: Right after you've gotten hurt, you'll need to stop any bleeding and try to reducepainand swelling. Below are some things you can do until you can get to a doctor. When to see a doctor If you only have swelling and moderate pain, you may choose to wait to see your doctor. Your symptoms could improve, and you might get better on your own. But see your doctor if 3 to 5 days have passed and you notice any of the following: Get emergency help if you have any of these things in addition to nose pain: A broken nose can happen in a car accident, during a sporting event, in a fistfight, because of a fall, or even from running into a door. Your chances of a broken nose might be higher if you have problems with balance or you do certain things regularly, including: You'll need to stop any bleeding and try to reduce pain and swelling. Do these things until you can get to a doctor: Stop the bleeding Ease the pain Reduce the swelling To find out if your nose is broken, your doctor probably will: X-rays and other types of scans aren’t usually needed to diagnose a broken nose, but your doctor might recommend them if they think you could have other injuries. If your doctor confirms that your nose is broken, they'll likely wait for the swelling to go down before deciding whether or not it needs to be fixed. If it does, they'll choose to fix it either with surgery or without. They'll know what's best, based on your injuries. Here's what you can expect from both procedures. Manual realignment If your doctor decides your nose can be fixed without surgery, they'll have to do it within 1 to 2 weeks of your accident. If they wait any longer, the injury will begin to heal on its own, even if the bones are out of place. Your doctor will give you painmedicationbefore the procedure. Then, they'll open your nostrils with a flat tool called a speculum. They'll use a special instrument to align your broken bones and cartilage back in place. Your doctor will use packing inside your nose. They'll also put a dressing on the outside. That'll keep your nose in place while it heals. They may give youantibioticsto prevent infection. Surgery Your doctor probably will choose this option if your nasal fracture is severe or has gone untreated for more than 2 weeks. The goal is to put your bones back in their proper place and reshape your nose, if necessary. You'll get pain medication for the procedure. You might also have to have nasal surgery to fix any breathing problems. In many cases, you can go home the day of surgery. But you may have to stay home for about a week due to swelling and bruising. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Broken Nose.” American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery: “Nasal fractures,” “Nosebleeds,” “Nose Surgery.” National Health Service (U.K.): “Broken Nose.” Cleveland Clinic: “Broken Nose.” ENT Health: “Nasal Fractures.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.