If a child, or a teen younger than 16, has jointinflammationand stiffness for more than 6 weeks, it may bejuvenile idiopathic arthritis, formerly called juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Theinflammationcan cause redness, swelling, warmth, and soreness in the joints. But some children who have it might not complain about thejoint pain. The condition can affect any joint, and it may limit how well that joint works. Most children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis recover fully. With the right treatment, they’re likely to do well and live a normal life. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis is anautoimmune disorder. This means that the immune system attacks healthy cells and tissues. That causes theinflammation. Researchers don't know exactly why it happens. But they think it's a two-step process. First, something in a child’s genes makes them more likely to get it. Then something else, like a virus, triggers the arthritis itself. Adults who have it usually have symptoms all their lives. But studies show that by adulthood, 70% of children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis outgrow it. They don’t have symptoms anymore. Besidesjoint pain, it may causechronic feverandanemia, which is a shortage of redblood cells. It can also affect theheart,lungs,eyes, andnervous system. Flare-ups, times when it gets worse, can last for several weeks. Later on, symptoms may lessen. They include: There are three kinds. Each type is based on the number of joints involved, the symptoms, and certain antibodies that may be in theblood. It’s the most common form. About half of all children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis have this type. It usually affects large joints like theknees. Girls under age 8 are most likely to get it. Some children with this type have special proteins in thebloodcalledantinuclear antibodies. They are more likely to geteyediseases likeiritis, which is inflammation of the iris, or colored part of theeye. They can also getuveitis, which is inflammation of the innereye. These children need regulareye examsby an ophthalmologist, a doctor who specializes in eye diseases. Lots of children with this condition will outgrow it by adulthood. Still,eye problemscan continue, and joint symptoms may come back. About 30% of all children with juvenileidiopathic arthritishave this type. It usually affects the small joints, like those in the hands and feet, but it can sometimes involve the large joints. This type of juvenile idiopathic arthritis is usually symmetrical. That means it affects the same joints on both sides of the body. Some children who have this have an immune system chemical calledrheumatoid factorin theirblood. They often have a more severe form of the condition. Signs of this includejoint swelling, fever, and a light pinkrash. It may involve theheart,liver,spleen, and lymph nodes. A small percentage of children who have it developarthritisin their joints. They may have severe arthritis that lasts into adulthood. Juvenileidiopathic arthritisis often hard to diagnose. Sometimes children who have it do not complain of pain. In fact, parents may not be aware of symptoms. Some symptoms are similar to other serious conditions like infections,cancer, bone disorders,Lyme disease, andlupus. If a doctor thinks a child may have juvenile idiopathic arthritis, they will ask about symptoms and the family’s medical history. They will give the child aphysical examto look for joint swelling,rashes, signs of internal organ inflammation, andeye problems. They may also take samples of the child’s blood and joint fluid, and use X-rays or other tests. Treatment usually includesmedicationsalong withexercise. The goals are to: Medicationsfor juvenile idiopathic arthritis include: NSAIDS(Nonsteroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs) The medicines can curb pain, fever, and inflammation. They come as a liquid or a pill. People usually take them from one to 4 times a day. Some common NSAIDs areaspirin,ibuprofen,naproxen, andtolmetin. While NSAIDs ease pain and inflammation, they also have side effects. These includestomach pain,nausea,vomiting,headache, andanemia. Sometimes your doctor will give you anotherstomach-protecting medication to take with the NSAIDs. This will makestomachbleeding less likely. If you child does not respond well to NSAIDS, the doctor may prescribe a new drug called Xatmep. Xatmep is the first ready-to-use oral solution formulation of methotrexate to be approved for use in children withpolyarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis. An aggressive therapy, this medicine helps reduce further joint damage and helps preserve joint function. Side effects can include dizziness, fatigue, chills and fever.  Meds That Stop the Condition From Getting Worse Your doctor may prescribe “DMARDs,” which stands for Disease-Modifying Antirheumatic Drugs. They also help withjoint stiffness, pain, and swelling. Examples includehydroxychloroquine(Plaquenil),methotrexate, andsulfasalazine(Azulfidine). It may take about 3 to 6 months for these medicines to work. Because these are strong drugs, your child will need frequent tests to check for side effects. They can includeanemia, low blood count, andkidneyandliverproblems. Other possible problems could bestomachaches,diarrhea,vomiting,nausea,headaches, rashes, loss of appetite, andweakness. “Biologic” Drugs for Your Immune System These drugs are genetically engineered to work on the immune system. They includeadalimumab(Humira), adalimumab-atto (Amjevita), a biosimilar to Humira,anakinra(Kineret),etanercept(Enbrel),etanercept-szzs (Ereizi), a biosimilar to Enbrel,infliximab(Remicade), and infliximab-dyyb (Inflectra), a biosimilar to Remicade. If you take them, you are more likely to get an infection, including serious diseases liketuberculosis. Some biologics are only approved by the FDA for use in adults. Check with your doctor about which ones are appropriate for children. If You Need Corticosteroids These are strong, anti-inflammatory drugs. Doctors usually prescribe them only if other treatments don’t work, or if the condition is severe. This type of steroid isn’t the kind that bulks up your muscles. Corticosteroids come in pills or liquids, and are usually prescribed for short periods of time and in low dosages. Serious side effects can happen if they’re taken too long. These include stunted growth, ulcers, mood swings,weightgain, "moon face," muscle weakness,high blood pressure,osteoporosis,cataracts, and infections. Examples ofsteroidsinclude dexamethasone,hydrocortisone,methylprednisolone,prednisolone, andprednisone. Exercise andphysical activityare important for children with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Movement brings less pain, builds strength, and keeps joints moving well. With the help of physical and occupational therapists, children learn simple ways to do everyday things. Therapists teach them exercises to improve their flexibility and strength. It can help to use hot andcold treatments. For instance, a warm compress can loosen up a stiff muscle and an ice pack often reduces swelling and inflammation. Therapists can also make splints for children to correctly position their joints and reduce pain. They can be used onknees, wrists, and fingers, as well as at night during sleep. If your child has juvenile idiopathic arthritis, encourage them to get out there and be active. Avoid contact sports and instead go for things that are not stressful on the joints, likeswimming. Eye problems are linked to some forms of juvenile idiopathic arthritis, so keep up with your child’seye tests. The condition can also cause problems withoral healthif it affects the jaw and makes it hard to brush and flossteeth. Dentists can recommend specialtoothbrushesand floss to help children take care of their mouths. Temporomandibular joint(TMJ) orjaw painsometimes happens with juvenile idiopathic arthritis. Certain exercises can help withjaw painand stiffness. If the lower jaw doesn’t develop correctly, it can cause anoverbite. An orthodontist can usually fix this. In some cases, surgery may be needed. You may also want to check with your child’s doctor about their weight. Some children with the condition may need more calories. Others gain too much weight because they have problems being active, or because of side effects from medication. Extra weight is hard on the joints. SOURCES: American College of Rheumatology: "Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis."Arthritis Foundation: "Juvenile Rheumatoid Arthritis."FDA: “FDA approves Amjevita, a biosimilar to Humira.”National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: "Rheumatoid Arthritis." Avoid these 6 common mistakes. Decrease pain, increase energy. How much do you know? Swelling, fatigue, pain, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.