Diabetic ketoacidosis, also known as DKA, is a buildup of acids in yourblood. It can happen when yourblood sugaris too high for too long. DKA is a serious complication ofdiabetesand could be life-threatening, but it usually takes many hours to become that serious. You can treat it and prevent it, too. Diabetic ketoacidosis symptoms can appear quickly and may even be your first warning sign that you have diabetes. Symptoms include: Call your doctor or go to the emergency room right away if you have any of the symptoms below and your ketones are moderate to high when you test them using a home kit, or if you have more than one symptom:  Diabetic ketoacidosis usually happens because your body doesn't have enoughinsulin. Your cells can't use the sugar in your blood for energy, so they use fat for fuel instead. Burningfatmakes acids called ketones. If the process goes on for a while, they could build up in your blood. That excess can change the chemical balance of your blood and throw off your entire system. People withtype 1 diabetesare at risk for ketoacidosis, since their bodies don't make any insulin. Your ketones can also go up when you: DKA can happen to people withtype 2 diabetes, but it's rare. If you have type 2, especially when you're older, you're more likely to have a condition with some similar symptoms called HHNS (hyperosmolar hyperglycemic nonketotic syndrome). It can lead to severedehydration. Risk factors for DKA include:  Test your ketones when your blood sugar is over 250 mg/dL (milligrams per deciliter) or you have any of the above symptoms of high blood sugar, such asdry mouth, feeling really thirsty, or peeing a lot. You can check yoursugar levelswith aurine teststrip. Someglucose metersmeasure ketones, too. Try to bring your blood sugar down, and check your ketones again in 30 minutes. Your doctor can give you aphysical exam, ask about your symptoms, and discuss your medical history. They can order these tests to diagnose DKA too:  If you don't treat ketoacidosis, you could pass out, go into acoma, and possibly die. You should go to the hospital to treat DKA. There, you will receive emergency treatments like:  DKA complications are possible if you don’t have emergency treatments like electrolyte replacement and insulin. They include:  Your doctor may change your insulin dose, or the kind you use, to prevent DKA from happening again. Good blood sugar control will help you avoid ketoacidosis in the future. Make sure you manage your diabetes through yourdiet,exercise,medications, and self-care. Follow these steps to help prevent DKA:  SOURCES: American Diabetes Association: "DKA (Ketoacidosis) & Ketones," "Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemic Nonketotic Syndrome (HHNS)." Mayo Clinic: "Diabetic Ketoacidosis." Beth Israel Lahey Health Winchester Hospital: “Diabetic Ketoacidosis.” American Association for Clinical Chemistry: “Comprehensive Metabolic Panel (CMP).” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.