Klinefelter syndrome is a genetic condition in which a boy is born with an extra X chromosome. Instead of the typical XY chromosomes in men, they have XXY, so this condition is sometimes called XXY syndrome. Men with Klinefelter usually don’t know they have it until they run into problems trying to have a child. There’s no cure, but it can be treated. You get the extra X chromosome by chance. Either the egg or thespermthat came together to create you had an extra X chromosome. Older women have a slightly higher chance of having a boy with XXY syndrome, but the chance is small. Men with Klinefelter may have: Some men show symptoms of Klinefelter as children, but others don’t know they have it until puberty or adulthood. Many men never realize that they have it because symptoms aren’t always present. Symptoms of Klinefelter vary with age and include: Babies: Children: Teenagers: Adults: To diagnose Klinefelter syndrome, your doctor will start with aphysical examand questions about your symptoms and general health. They’ll probably examine your chest,penis, and testicles and do a few simple tests, such as checking your reflexes. Your doctor may then run two main tests: It’s never too late to treat Klinefelter, but the earlier you start, the better. One common treatment istestosterone replacement therapy. It can start at puberty and can spur typical body changes, such as facial hair and a deeper voice. It can also help with penis size and stronger muscles and bones, but it won’t affect testicle size or fertility. Testosterone replacement therapythroughout your life can help prevent some of the long-term problems that come with Klinefelter. Other treatments include: If your child has Klinefelter, things that might help include: Many problems caused by Klinefelter are because of lower testosterone levels. You may have a slightly higher chance of: Treatment can help boys and men with Klinefelter live happy, healthy lives. Advances in fertility treatments have made it possible for some to father children. In general, life expectancy is normal. Some research has found that life expectancy for men with the condition may be a year or two less than those without it  because of other health problems linked to Klinefelter. SOURCES: Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Klinefelter Syndrome.” NHS: “Klinefelter Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: “Klinefelter Syndrome.” Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Are people with Klinefelter syndrome able to have children?” “What is Klinefelter syndrome?” Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism: “Klinefelter Syndrome: A Clinical Update.” 11 things every man should stop believing. What it means for your overall health. Your guide to sculpted shoulders, better biceps, and more. What you need to know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.