You can’t move like you used to. It’s painful to walk the dog, climb a flight of stairs, or simply get out of a chair. You’ve tried medicines, injections, and physical therapy. Nothing seems to work. If that’s the case, it could be time to considerknee replacement surgery. Also known as arthroplasty,knee replacement surgeryis one of the most common bone surgeries in the United States. It can help ease the pain caused by severearthritis. It also may help you move more freely. U.S. doctors perform more than 600,000knee replacementsurgeries each year, many of which are now being done robotically. During surgery, anorthopedic surgeonremoves the damaged part of thekneeand replaces it with an artificialjointmade of metal and plastic. The artificial joint is then attached to the thigh bone, shin, and kneecap with a special material such as acrylic cement. Osteoarthritisis the main reason why people go for knee replacement surgery. The age-related condition is very common and occurs whencartilage-- the cushion between thekneeand the bone joints -- breaks down. Other reasons include: There are 5 main types of knee replacement surgery: Knee replacement surgery, which can take 1 to 2 hours, has become so precise that doctors can choose from a variety of knee designs that suit your height,weight, and activity level. The implants, as they are called, are made from a variety of materials, including metal, ceramic, or plastic. They are built to allow easy movement. Some implants are made just for women -- to closely match their anatomy. A common artificial knee design replaces the PCL (posterior cruciate ligament), located in the back of the knee. Another replaces the ACL (anterior cruciate ligament). Some artificial knees are designed for partial knee replacement, while others are built to keep the PCL and ACL right where they are. Doctors first started replacing knees in the early 1970s. Back then, surgeons said the new knees would last about a decade or so. Today’s implants will last 20 years. By 2030, it’s estimated doctors will perform about 450,000 total knee replacement operations a year. SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons: “Total Knee Replacement.” Arthritis Foundation: “Osteoarthritis.” National Institutes of Heath: “Knee Replacement.” Arthritis Research: “What are the different types of knee replacement surgery?" Mayo Clinic: “Knee Replacement.” American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons: “Knee Replacement Implants.” Cleveland Clinic: “Total Knee Replacement.” Risk factors for developing knee osteoarthritis early. Get simple tips to make life a little easier, safer. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.