Yourkneeis the largest joint in your body. The kneecap, or patella, is thebonethat covers your knee. It helps give the joint strength and structure, which allows your legs to bend and turn safely. Because your knee has many working parts and carries a heavy load, it’s prone to problems. If you have any of these issues with your kneecap, see your doctor so you can figure out the right treatment. Some of them can get better with physical therapy, while others may need surgery. Your kneecap can get knocked out of place, or dislocated, when your leg is planted and you suddenly change direction. It can also happen when something hits your leg and forces it in another direction. Signs that you’ve dislocated your kneecap include:  Yourkneealso might dislocate without an injury because there’s a problem with the structure. That’s called patellar instability. It’s most common in children andteens, though it can happen in adults, too. Structural issues might include: No matter the cause, symptoms of kneecapdislocationare the same. If it’s only part of the way out, you’ll get a brace to keep you from moving your knee. Within 1 or 2 weeks, you’ll start physical therapy to strengthen your thigh muscles. You can expect about 1 to 3 months for recovery. If it pops totally out, your doctor will first gently push it back into place. In some cases, you might also need surgery to repair damage to your thigh bone or the cartilage behind your knee. If it keeps happening, you may need surgery to tighten the ligaments and help keep your kneecap on track. This happens when your kneecap slides a little out of place but doesn’t dislocate entirely. It’s also a type of patellar instability. Symptoms that your kneecap has subluxated include:  This is a serious injury where you break your kneecap, usually: If you break your kneecap, your symptoms might include: If the broken pieces are still lined up, you’ll get an immobilizer brace to hold everything in place as you heal. Sometimes, you can still put weight on yourknee. In other cases, you might be off yourfeetfor 6 to 8 weeks. For a more serious fracture, you typically need surgery. Your doctor may use screws, pins, or wires to hold thebonepieces in place. In either case, you’ll needphysical therapyto work through stiffness, get your range of motion back, and build leg strength. The patellar tendon starts in your thigh muscles, wraps around your kneecap, and connects to the top of your shinbone. If you completely tear the tendon above the kneecap (the quadriceps tendon) or below it (the patellar tendon), you won’t be able to straighten your knee. Also called patellar tendinopathy or jumper’s knee, this is an injury to the patellar tendon. It’s common with people who play sports like basketball and volleyball. You typically start treatment with basic self-care, like rest and over-the-counterpainrelievers. From there, you might need to see a physical therapist who can: If these treatments don’t work, your doctor may talk to you about getting a cortisone injection to help with pain and swelling. The drawback with this treatment is that it can also weaken the tendon and make a tear more likely. Another option is to get an injection ofplatelet-richplasma. But this has not been proven to work better than physical therapy or other treatments. It’s rare, but if nothing else works, you might need surgery to remove damaged tissue and repair the tendon. This catch-all term describes pain in the front of the knee and around the kneecap. Sometimes it’s called “runner’s knee” or a “tracking” problem. Typically caused by overuse,patellofemoral pain syndromecan lead to pain, stiffness, or a buckling feeling in the knee and lower thighbone. It’s common in athletes, especially females and young adults. If you have this condition, you might hurt when you: You might also hear popping or crackling in your knees when you climb stairs or get up after you’ve been sitting a long time. Patellofemoral pain syndromecan happen because ofstrainon your knees, like climbing too many steps. The pain might start because you’ve suddenly started toexercisemore, such as going from working out 3 days a week to 6. Or maybe you’ve made your workouts more intense. Other things that might bring on patellofemoral pain syndrome: Often, it gets better with over-the-counter pain relievers and the “RICE” method: Your doctor may suggest physical therapy to: Rarely, you might need surgery to remove damagedcartilage, loosen tendons, or realign the patellar tendon and the top of the shinbone. Patellofemoral pain syndrome also may come from an alignment problem in how your knee works. When you have misalignment, or a patellar tracking issue, your kneecap can push to one side of the trochlear groove when you bend your knee. That irritates the area, causing pain. Tracking problems could come from overall alignment issues between your leg and hip. Weak thigh muscles can also be part of the problem. Damage to the cartilage behind the kneecap is called chondromalacia. You may feel a dull pain around or under your kneecap that gets worse when you go down stairs. Again, you’ll start with self-care: You might also see a physical therapist for help with: If these treatments don’t work, you may need surgery to remove damaged cartilage and correct kneecap alignment. A bursa is a small, fluid-filled sac. It eases friction between bones and soft tissue, like tendons. With prepatellarbursitis, the bursa in the front of your knee gets irritated and swells with extra fluid. That puts pressure on your knee that leads to pain. If it happens due to an injury, it usually goes away on its own with a little self-care: If these treatments don’t work, your doctor may: If the bursa is infected, you’ll also needantibiotics. If they don’t help, you may need surgery to get out the extra fluid. If you have repeated problems with the bursa, your doctor may suggest you have surgery to remove it. You can’t avoid every possible injury to your kneecap. But you can take some simple steps to help keep your knees healthy:  SOURCES: Kidshealth.org from Nemours Foundation: “Jumper’s Knee.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Common Knee Injuries,” “Patellar Dislocation and Instability in Children,” “Patellar Fractures,” “Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome.” U.K. National Health Service: "Dislocated Kneecap." Johns Hopkins Health Library: "Patellar Instability." Massachusetts General Hospital: "Patellofemoral Instability." Shepard Center Spine and Pain Institute: “Patellar Tracking Disorder.” Texas Health Physicians Group: “Patellar Tracking Disorder.” University of California, San Francisco: “Knee: Quadriceps and Patellar Tendon Rupture.” OrthInfo: “Patellar (Kneecap) Fractures,” “Patellar Tendon Tear,” “Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome,” “Unstable Kneecap,” “Prepatellar Bursitis.” Houston Methodist: “Patellar Tendonitis,” “Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome,” “Prepatellar Bursitis.” Mayo Clinic: “Patellar Tendonitis,” “Patellofemoral Pain Syndrome.” National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: “Knee Problems.” Cleveland Clinic: “Knee Pain (Chondromalacia Patellae).” Cedars-Sinai: “Chondromalacia.” Harvard Medical School: “Chondromalacia.” If you're living with knee pain, try these. Learn causes, treatments, and more. Dos and don'ts to follow. What to expect. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.