LAMlung disease(lymphangioleiomyomatosis) is a rare lung disease that tends to affect women of childbearing age. In LAM lung disease, muscle cells that line thelungs' airways andbloodvessels begin to multiply abnormally. These muscle cells spread into areas of the lung where they don't belong. The air sacs in the lung also swell and form small pockets calledcysts. As the cysts develop throughout the lungs, LAM causesbreathing problemssimilar toemphysema. The muscle cells can spread outside the lung, forming noncancerous tumors on organs in theabdomenand pelvis. No one knows what causes pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis.Estrogenseems to be involved, because women rarely develop LAM beforepubertyor aftermenopause. Fewer than 10 men are known to have ever developed LAM lung disease. Smokingisn't known to cause LAM: more than half of people with LAM lung disease have never smoked. LAM is so rare that it's unknown how often it really occurs. For example, during a three-year study by researchers, fewer than 250 people with LAM were identified in the U.S. Fewer than 2,000 women are known to have LAM today. LAM is notcancer, but appears similar to other conditions in whichbenign tumorsgrow uncontrollably. LAM lung disease shares some features with a different condition calledtuberous sclerosis. Most people with LAM lung disease experience shortness of breath. Other symptoms includewheezingandcough, which may be bloody. Often, people with LAM develop a sudden pneumothorax (collapsed lung). This occurs when one of the cysts near the lung's edge ruptures, allowing inhaled air to compress the lung. A pneumothorax usually causespainand shortness of breath. If muscle cells migrate to areas outside the lungs, LAM can cause other symptoms: In a few people with LAM, discovery of these benign tumors outside the lungs is the first sign of LAM lung disease. Most people with LAM see their doctor because of shortness of breath. Because LAM is so rare, it's often misdiagnosed at first asasthmaoremphysema. Generally, LAM is finally discovered after a long workup for shortness of breath. Tests frequently performed include: It's possible to diagnose LAM lung disease based on a woman's history and findings on high-resolutionCT scan. But doctors often recommend collecting a sample of lung tissue (biopsy) to confirm the diagnosis. Lungbiopsiescan be collected in different ways: A physician (pathologist) then examines lung biopsy tissue, helping make the diagnosis of LAM lung disease with greater certainty. The drugsirolimus(Rapamune) is the first drug approved to treat lymphangioleiomyomatosis. The drug has been found to help improve the lung capacity in patients, allowing them to breathe easier. In addition, inhaledbronchodilators(albuterol,ipratropium) can help open the airways, reducing shortness of breath in some people. Patients with LAM lung disease should avoid smoking cigarettes as well as second hand smoke. Because hormones likeestrogenseem to be involved in LAM lung disease, treatments that manipulate hormone levels could help some people with LAM. A number of hormone-related treatments have been tested in women with LAM lung disease: Inclinical trialsthat tested these therapies, some women were helped, but others were not. People who experience pneumothorax generally must undergo procedures to reinflate the collapsed lung, and prevent its recurrence. If pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis progresses and becomes disabling, lung transplantation may be an option. Though it's a drastic treatment, most people undergoinglung transplantfor LAM lung disease gain improved lung function and quality of life after surgery. Pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis is progressive, and so far there is no cure. Most women with LAM experience a steady decline in lung function, with increased shortness of breath over time. However, women vary widely in their experience of living with LAM lung disease. Some rapidly progress while others progress slowly: in some studies, nearly 90% of women were alive 10 years after diagnosis with LAM. However, surviving as long as 20 years after diagnosis is rare. Researchers are working to identify how muscle cells go awry in LAM. Clinical trials of experimentaldrugsto treat LAM lung disease are also under way. SOURCES: Sullivan E.J.Chest, 1998; vol 114: pp 1689-1703. Ryu J.H.American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,2006; vol 173: pp 105-111. Crausman R.S.American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine,1996; vol 153: pp 1368-1376. Bonetti F.The American Journal of Surgical Pathology,1993; vol 17: pp 1092-1102. McCormack F.X.Chest,2008; vol 133: pp 507-516. National Heart, Blood, and Lung Institute. You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.