Alatex allergyis when your body’simmune systemoverreacts to certain kinds of proteins found in natural rubber latex that’s used to make things like rubber gloves,condoms, and some medical devices. Doctors don’t know what causes it. Coming in contact with latex and rubber products over and over may be part of the reason it happens. About 5% to 10% of health care workers have some form of latexallergy. Other people who are more likely than most people to get it include those who have: Rubber industry workers and people who usecondoms are also more likely than others to get a latex allergy. You can get exposed to latex: There are three types of latex reactions: 1. Irritant contactdermatitis.This is the least-threatening type, and it’s not an allergic skin reaction. It usually happens due to repeated exposure to chemicals in latex gloves and leads to dryness,itching, burning, scaling, andskin problems. This generally starts 12-24 hours after contact. 2. Allergic contact dermatitis.This is a delayed reaction to additives used in latex processing. It results in the same type of reactions as irritantcontact dermatitis. But the reaction is more severe, spreads to more parts of the body, and lasts longer. Symptoms can start anywhere from 1 to 4 days after you've come in contact with latex. 3. Immediateallergic reaction(latex hypersensitivity).This one is the most serious. It can show up as anasal allergywith hay fever-like symptoms,conjunctivitis(pinkeye),cramps,hives, and severe itching. It’s rare, but symptoms may also include rapid heartbeat, tremors,chest pain,trouble breathing,low blood pressure, oranaphylaxis, asevere allergic reactionthat can be life-threatening. If you have severe symptoms, call your doctor or 911 immediately, or go to the nearest emergency room. Doctors diagnose a latex allergy in people who: If you need a skin test to check on a latex allergy, anallergyspecialist must supervise it, in case you have a severe reaction. There’s no cure for a latex allergy. If you’re allergic to latex, the best course of action is to avoid contact with it. If you do have a reaction, the treatment will depend on how serious it is. For irritated skin, these may be enough: If your reaction is severe, you may need these right away: If you have a latexallergy, wear a medical alert bracelet or another type of ID in case of an emergency. You may also need to carry twoepinephrineshots if your doctor recommends that. An allergy to latex can become worse the more you come in contact with it. If you know you have this condition, be aware of products that may have the potential to cause a reaction. Ask your doctor if you need to avoid them. Many items have latex in them. Read product labels carefully. You may need to ask product makers to be sure. Home goods that are made with latex include: Outside the home, latex is also in many items, such as: Medical products containing latex include: Tell them about your latex allergy at least 24 hours before your appointment. The hospital or doctor's office should have a plan in place so they can use products like nonlatex gloves to treat you. Ask for the first appointment in the morning. Even if your doctor or dentist uses latex-free gloves for you, there can be latex particles in the air from gloves used with other patients. You're more likely to avoid these particles by getting there early. If you have to stay in the hospital, you'll usually be given your own room, free of products that might give you a reaction. Between 30% and 50% of people who have a latex allergy also have reactions to eating, touching, or even smelling certain foods. This happens because some fruits and vegetables have proteins that are structured a lot like the ones that cause the reaction to latex. It’s called a cross-reaction. These foods include: Almonds, peppermint, and mustard can also cause cross-reactions. If you’re allergic to any of these foods, you may also have a latex allergy, even if you don’t know it. Let your doctor and dentist know so they can keep from exposing you. SOURCES: American Academy of Allergy Asthma and Immunology: “Latex Allergy Definition,” “Latex Allergy,” “Latex Allergy: Tips to Remember," "Latex Allergy Symptoms and Diagnosis." Pollart, S.American Family Physician, December 2009. Allergy & Asthma Network: “Latex Allergy and Foods.” American Latex Allergy Association: "About Latex Allergy: Symptoms,” "Common Latex Products." Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America: "Latex Allergy." Up to Date: "Contact dermatitis (including latex dermatitis) (Beyond the Basics)." New York State Department of Public Health: "Latex Allergy." Division of Medical Devices: “Latex-Fruit Syndrome and Class 2 Food Allergy.” American Academy of Family Physicians: "Latex Allergy." Cincinnati Children's: "Latex Allergy." New York State Department of Health: "Latex Allergy - Information for Health Professionals." Get help from methods that are medicine-free. What you should know before starting this treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.