Lichen sclerosusis a rareskincondition that usually shows up on your genital or anal areas. But it can also affect your upper arms, torso, andbreasts. The condition mostly affects adult women after menopause. But other people can get it, too. Although there’s no cure, there are treatments to manage your symptoms. Doctors don’t know why some people get lichen sclerosus. They think it may be due to genes, hormones, an infection, or some combination of these things. Another theory is that yourimmune systemattacks your skin. It may even be caused by an old skin injury. If you have it, you may notice small, shiny, and smooth white patches on your skin. These patches can become bigger and the skin may become thin and wrinkled. Your skin may tear easily, causing largebruises(which may be red or purple) to appear.Itchingis very common. So are scarring, bleeding, or blistering. But some people may not have any symptoms at all. Your doctor may do aphysical examand check on how your skin looks. They may order abiopsy, too. That means they will remove a small piece of your skin and send it to a lab to be viewed under a microscope. This will confirm or rule out the diagnosis. Serious complications can happen, but they’re rare. If it affects the genitals, you might be slightly more likely to develop a type ofskin cancercalled squamous cellcancer. Women who have it are also at slightly higher risk forvulvar cancer, which iscancerthat affects the outer part of the genitals, called the vulva. It can also cause changes to the way your genitals look. Some women may have chronic, or ongoing,painin the vulva or a narrowing of the vaginal opening. These complications can make sex difficult. Although there’s no cure for lichen sclerosus, there are treatments that can help. If you have it on your genitals, you should get it treated, even if you don’t have symptoms. When left untreated, it can lead to problems with sex or urination. Patches on other parts of the body usually go away with time. Your doctor will probably first give you asteroidcream to put on the problem area. This can stop the itching. But it may take longer -- a few weeks or months --for the skin to return to a more normal appearance. You may need to use these creams or ointments for a long period of time to keep the condition from coming back. You’ll need to keep up with your doctor appointments, since long-term use of steroid creams or ointments can make the skin become red or thin and causestretch marks. The treatment can also cause genitalyeast infections. If thecortisonecream or ointment doesn’t work for you, there are other treatment options. They includevitamin A-likedrugscalled retinoids, ultraviolet lighttherapy, ortacrolimusointment. Tacrolimus ointment, as well as one calledpimecrolimusointment, are creams that help yourimmune systemrecognize lichen sclerosus as an invader. Surgery to remove patches on the genital area of women doesn’t happen much, since the patches return. If a woman has severe vaginal scarring that causes problems with sex, surgery can help. But it’s only an option once the condition is under control. Surgery to treat lichen sclerosus in men can be a good option. Doctors often do acircumcision, which is removing the foreskin of thepenis. After that, the condition probably won’t come back. Add a few inches of warmwaterto your bathtub and relax. A bath can help with discomfort caused by itching and scratching. Talk to your doctor about over-the-counterantihistamineskin creams to help with any discomfort. Avoid tight clothing, perfumed genital sprays, harsh skin cleansers, and scented dryer or fabric sheets. It may also help to wear cotton underwear during the day and no underwear when sleeping at night. SOURCES: American Journal of Clinical Dermatology: “Diagnosis and Treatment of Lichen Sclerosus, An Update.” National Institutes of Health National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, “What is Lichen Sclerosus?” GARD: Genetic and Rare Disease Information Center, National Institutes of Health, “Lichen Sclerosus.” American Cancer Society, “What are the risk factors for vulvar cancer?” Mayo Clinic, Diseases and Conditions, “Lichen Sclerosus.” American Academy of Family Physicians, FamilyDoctor.org, “Lichen Sclerosus.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.