You want to lose weight and keep it off for good. These five strategies will help you do just that. Most people trying to lose weight only focus on their ultimate goal: dropping pounds. But it's important not to lose sight of the diet and exercise changes that will get you there. Choose two or three diet and exercise goals at a time that you are willing to take on. And make sure they are specific and realistic. For example, "exercise more" is a wonderful goal, but it's not specific. "Walk 5 miles every day" is specific and measurable. But is it realistic if you're just starting out? "Walk 30 minutes every day" is better, but what happens if work or weather interferes? "Walk 30 minutes for 5 days each week" is specific and realistic. Are there situations that make you want to eat more? Start noticing them. For example, you may learn that you're more likely to overeat while you're bored or stressed. Then figure out ways to get around those triggers. Do something else to soothe your stress, for instance. Also, you might want to put treats away. You're more likely to eat them if they're visible and easy to get to. That's right: You should feel full. But how you do that might surprise you. It's mostly about time: 15 minutes, to be specific. You need at least that much time to feel full. So eat slower, giving yourbrainenough time to notice that you've eaten. What you eat can also help. Think fiber (like fruits and veggies) to fill up. Another trick is to use smaller plates so that small portions do not appear too small. Also, changing your eating schedule can help you reach your goal, especially if you tend to skip or delay meals and overeat later. A good reward is something that is desirable, timely, and depends on meeting your goal. Rewards may include treating yourself to a movie ormassage, taking an afternoon off from work, or giving an hour of time to yourself. Keep in mind that many small rewards, given for meeting small goals, can work better than bigger rewards for long, difficult goals. Jot down things like how much youexerciseand what you eat. There are many apps that can help. Doing this can really open youreyesto what you are doing and what you need to do to meet your weight loss goals. SOURCES: Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Weight Watchers. Test your knowledge of different types. What to know before taking them. Are they closer than you think? What to expect. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.