 Lung diseases are some of the most common medical conditions in the world. Tens of millions of people have lung disease in the U.S. alone. Smoking, infections, and genes cause most lung diseases. Yourlungsare part of a complex system, expanding and relaxing thousands of times each day to bring in oxygen and send out carbon dioxide. Lung disease can happen when there are problems in any part of this system. Your windpipe (trachea) branches into tubes called bronchi, which in turn become smaller tubes throughout your lungs. Diseases that can affect these airways include: Your airways branch into tiny tubes (bronchioles) that end in clusters of air sacs called alveoli. These air sacs make up most of your lung tissue. Lung diseases affecting your alveoli include: The interstitium is the thin, delicate lining between your alveoli. Tiny blood vessels run through the interstitium and let gas transfer between the alveoli and your blood. Various lung diseases affect the interstitium: The right side of yourheartgets low-oxygen blood from your veins. It pumps blood into your lungs through the pulmonaryarteries. These blood vessels can have diseases, as well. The pleura is the thin lining that surrounds your lung and lines the inside of your chest wall. A tiny layer of fluid lets the pleura on your lung's surface slide along the chest wall with each breath. Lung diseases of the pleura include: Your chest wall also plays an important role in breathing. Muscles connect your ribs to each other, helping your chest expand. Your diaphragm descends with each breath, also causing chest expansion. Diseases that affect your chest wall include:  SOURCE: Mason, R.Murray & Nadel's Textbook of Respiratory Medicine 5th Edition, Elsevier Saunders, 2010. UpToDate: “Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).” You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.