Lymphoma iscancerthat begins in infection-fighting cells of theimmune system, called lymphocytes. These cells are in the lymph nodes,spleen, thymus, bone marrow, and other parts of the body. When you have lymphoma, lymphocytes change and grow out of control. There are two main types of lymphoma: Non-Hodgkin and Hodgkin lymphoma involve different types of lymphocyte cells. Every type of lymphoma grows at a different rate and responds differently to treatment. Lymphoma is very treatable, and the outlook can vary depending on the type of lymphoma and its stage. Your doctor can help you find the right treatment for your type and stage of the illness. Lymphoma is different fromleukemia. Each of these cancers starts in a different type of cell. Lymphoma is also not the same aslymphedema, which is a collection of fluid that forms in body tissues when there is damage or blockage to the lymph system. Scientists don't know what causes lymphoma in most cases. You might be more at risk if you: Warning signs of lymphoma include: Many of these symptoms can also be warning signs of other illnesses. See your doctor to find out for sure if you have lymphoma. Before you have any tests, your doctor will want to know: Your doctor will do a physical exam, including a check for swollen lymph nodes. This symptom doesn't mean you have cancer. Most of the time, an infection -- unrelated to cancer -- causes swollen lymph nodes. You might get a lymph nodebiopsyto check for cancer cells. For this test, a doctor will remove all or part of a lymph node, or use a needle to take a small amount of tissue from the affected node. You might also have one of these tests to help diagnose, stage, or manage lymphoma: The treatment you get depends on what type of lymphoma you have and its stage. The main treatments for non-Hodgkin lymphoma are: The main treatments for Hodgkin lymphoma are: If these treatments don't work, you might have astem celltransplant. First you'll get very high doses of chemotherapy. This treatment kills cancer cells, but it also destroys stem cells in your bone marrow that make new blood cells. After chemotherapy, you will get a transplant of stem cells to replace the ones that were destroyed. Two types of stem cell transplants can be done: Lymphoma treatment can cause side effects. Talk to your medical team about ways to relieve any symptoms you have. Also ask your doctor about changes to your diet and exercise that can help you feel better during your treatment. Ask a dietitian for help if you're not sure what types of food to eat. Exercises like walking orswimmingcan relieve fatigue and help you feel better during treatments like chemotherapy and radiation. You might also try alternative therapies like relaxation,biofeedback, or guided imagery to help relieve pain. Treatments have improved a lot, and many people do very well after treatment. Your doctor will talk to you about a survivorship care plan.  Your outlook depends on: You can get support from people who have gone through this kind of illness. Contact theLeukemia & Lymphoma SocietyorLymphoma Research Foundationto learn more. SOURCES: American Cancer Society: "Hodgkin Disease," "Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma." Cancer Research UK: "About Hodgkin Lymphoma." Leukaemia & Lymphoma Research: "Hodgkin Lymphoma Prognosis." Leukemia & Lymphoma Society: "The Lymphoma Guide." Lymphoma Research Foundation: "Physical Well-Being." NHS: "Non-Hodgkin lymphoma." What are they and why do we need them? See it in pictures, plus read the facts. Fight cancer one plate at a time. Do you know the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.