Lynch syndromeis a condition that makes people more likely to get certain cancers. It's passed down from parents to children through problem genes. People who have it have about a 40% to 80% chance of getting colorectalcancerby age 70. They’re also at risk for cancer of the uterus, ovaries, orstomach. And they tend to get cancer at younger ages than other people, often in their 30s and 40s. Lynch syndrome is sometimes called hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC). Other forms of the condition are Muir-Torre syndrome and Turcot syndrome, both of which raise your risk of other cancers and, in the case of Muir-Torre,skinlesions. Lynch syndrome is caused by a problem in one of five genes in your DNA. These are the genes that affect how well your cells can spot mistakes and fix them as they grow and multiply. When you have Lynch syndrome, your cells don't fix the errors. They make more and more flawed cells. Over time, that can cause cancer. If one of your parents has it, you have a 50% chance of getting it, too. If you getcolon cancerbefore age 50, that's a possible sign. Other things that may suggest a risk of Lynch syndrome include:  Lynch syndrome is the most common reason why some women get cancer of the uterus. It also can raise your risk of these types of cancer: If you have Lynch syndrome, you're also more likely to get noncancerous growths called polyps inside yourcolon. Polyps are common in older people, but people with Lynch syndrome may get them earlier in life. If you or someone in your family gets cancer, the doctor can do one of these tests on a small sample of the tumor to look for signs of Lynch syndrome: Tumors that were taken out in the previous few years can sometimes be tested. Some hospitals store tumor samples after surgery in case they need to be tested later. If someone in your family is diagnosed with Lynch syndrome, or if you think you’re at risk of getting it, you may want to get a gene test, which is done with a sample of yourblood. Your doctor can also refer you to a genetic counselor to discuss your risks and options. Your counselor can help you understand: A positive test for Lynch syndrome doesn't always mean you'll get cancer. Your risk is just much higher. A genetic counselor will work with you to decide what to do next. They can give you information about your options and emotional support. If you have Lynch syndrome, be sure to get regular screenings in order to find any cancers at their earliest stages, when they’re easiest to treat.Colon canceris 90% curable when you catch it early. If you’re at risk, you should start getting checkups much earlier than usual. Your screening schedule will depend on yourfamily historyand whether you’ve hadDNA testing. Here are some general guidelines: Some people with Lynch syndrome choose to have their colon taken out to help prevent cancer later on. Women who don’t want children in the future may also have their uterus and ovaries removed. Aside fromcancer screenings, a healthy lifestyle may help you prevent colorectal cancer.Dietshigh in veggies, fruit, andwhole grainscan help lower your risk. So can regularexercise, keeping ahealthy weight, and limitingalcohol. There is some evidence that takingaspirinevery day for at least 2 years may decrease the risk of Lynch-related cancer, but more research is needed to find the best dose and length of time for treatment. SOURCES: American Cancer Society: "Six Ways to Lower Your Risk for Colon Cancer." Cleveland Clinic: "Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC)." Dana-Farber Cancer Institute: "Cancer Genetics & Prevention: Lynch Syndrome." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "HNPCC." National Organization for Rare Diseases: "Lynch Syndrome." Cancer.net: "Lynch Syndrome." NIH/Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: "Turcot syndrome." CDC: "Have You or a Family Member Had Colorectal (Colon) Cancer?" MayoClinic.org: "Lynch Syndrome." U.S. National Library of Medicine Genetics Home Reference: "Lynch Syndrome," "What Happens During a Genetics Consultation?" UpToDate. The age people should begin getting routine screenings. What to expect when the cancer spreads to other areas. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.