Meningococcal meningitisis a rare but serious bacterial infection. It causes the membranes that cover thebrainand spinal cord to become inflamed. Each year, approximately 1,000 people in the U.S. getmeningococcal disease, which includesmeningitisand septicemia (blood infection). Meningococcal meningitis can be fatal or cause great harm without prompt treatment; as many as one out of five people who contract the infection have serious complications. According to the Centers for Disease Control, even with antibiotics, 10 to 15% of those infected will die and about 1 in 5 of those who survive are left with long-term disabilities that includedeafness,brain damage, neurological problems, and even loss of a limb. Here's what you need to know about the symptoms of meningococcal meningitis and ways to prevent and treat it. Bacteria and viruses are the two main causes of meningitis. The bacteriumNeisseria meningitidis, also called meningococcus, causes meningococcal meningitis. In children andteens, meningococcus is the most common cause ofbacterial meningitis. In adults, it is the second most common cause. Meningococcal bacteria may cause infection in a part of the body -- theskin, gastrointestinal tract, or respiratory tract, for instance. For unknown reasons, the bacteria may then spread through the bloodstream to thenervous system. When it gets there, it causes meningococcal meningitis. Bacteria can also enter the nervous system directly after severehead trauma, surgery, or infection. Your risk for meningococcal meningitis increases if you are exposed to the bacterium that causes it. Your risk also increases if you've had a recent upper respiratory infection. Babies, children, teens, and the elderly are at greatest risk. Symptoms of meningococcal meningitis may vary from case to case. The more common signs and symptoms include: A reddish or purpleskin rash(known as petechiae) is a very important sign to watch for. If it does not turn white when you press a glass against it, therashmay be a sign of bacteremia, or a bacterial infection in the bloodstream. This is a medical emergency. Othersymptoms of meningitisor bacteremia may include: Meningococcal meningitis can cause death or serious complications, such asbrain damage, paralysis,gangrene, ordeafness. To prevent these problems, it's important to act quickly. Donotwait. Seek immediate medical attention. Go to an emergency room or call 911 if: Tests can confirm a diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis. The doctor may startantibiotics, such aspenicillinorceftriaxone, by an IV, or intravenous line. You or your child may also need othermedicationto treat problems related to increased spinal fluid pressure. Doctors sometimes prescribesteroids. If you or someone you love has come into close contact (viasalivaor other oral secretions) with someone who has meningococcal meningitis -- such as at school,day care, work, or home -- it is very important to getantibioticsto prevent infection. Meningococcal meningitis is a serious disease -- even with treatment. That's why prevention is a far better approach. Themeningococcal vaccinecan prevent meningitis infection. In the U.S., three types of meningococcalvaccinesare used: Although they cannot prevent all types of meningococcal disease, both vaccines can prevent many types of the disease. Both are effective in nine out of 10 people. MCV4 tends to give longer protection and is better at preventing transmission of the disease. Doctors recommend a dose of MCV4, which is given as a shot, for children at age 11, and then a booster shot at age 16. If the first dose is missed, the MCV4 can be administered between ages 13 and 15, followed by a booster dose between ages 16 and 18. People ages 16-18 who are not high risk should also get a MenB vaccine. The vaccine is also designed for people ages 10-24 who are at high risk. It can be used in older adults. Other people at risk should also consider getting a vaccine. That includes: A second dose is recommended for everyone. Wait to get vaccinated if you are very ill at the time you're scheduled for the shot. Avoid the vaccine if you: Mild pain or redness at the injection site is common and should not be a problem. But call your doctor right away if you have a strong reaction to the vaccine. This includes ahigh fever,weakness, or signs of anallergic reaction, such astrouble breathing, a fast heartbeat, ordizziness. Photo Credit: Nydia Gregory / Medical Images SOURCES: Advisory Committee for Immunization Practices (ACIP). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: ''Meningococcal Disease: Help Prevent It.'' MedlinePlus: "Meningitis - meningococcal." CDC: "Meningococcal Vaccines: What You Need to Know." Nemours Foundation: "Meningitis." Meningitis Research Foundation: "Symptoms." National Network for Immunization Information: "Vaccine Information: Meningococcal Disease." National Organization for Rare Disorders - Photo Caption Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Photo Caption Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.