A sexual problem, or sexual dysfunction, refers to a problem during any phase of thesexual response cyclethat prevents the individual or couple from experiencing satisfaction from the sexual activity. The sexual response cycle has four phases: excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution. While research suggests that sexual dysfunction is common (43% of women and 31% of men report some degree of difficulty), it is a topic that many people are hesitant to discuss. Fortunately, most cases of sexual dysfunction are treatable, so it is important to share your concerns with your partner and doctor. Sexual dysfunction can be a result of a physical or psychological condition. Both men and women are affected by sexual problems. They can occur in adults of all ages. Among those commonly affected are seniors, which may be related to a decline in health associated with aging. The most commonsexual problems in menare ejaculation disorders, erectile dysfunction, and inhibited sexual desire. There are different types of ejaculation disorders, including: Premature ejaculation, the most common form of sexual dysfunction in men, often is due to nervousness over how well they will perform during sex. But causes are often unclear. In some cases, premature and inhibited ejaculation are caused by a lack of attraction for a partner, past traumatic events, and psychological factors, including a strict religious background that causes the person to viewsexas sinful. Certain drugs, including someantidepressants, may affect ejaculation, as cannerve damageto the spinal cord or back. Retrograde ejaculation is common in males withdiabeteswho suffer fromdiabetic neuropathy(nerve damage). This is due to problems with the nerves in thebladderand the bladder neck that allow the ejaculate to flow backward and into the bladder. In other men, retrograde ejaculation occurs after operations on the bladder neck orprostate, or after certain abdominal operations. In addition, certain medications, particularly those used to treatmood disorders, may cause problems with ejaculation. This generally does not require treatment unless it impairsfertility. Also known as impotence or ED,erectile dysfunctionis defined as the inability to attain and/or maintain an erection suitable for intercourse.Causes of erectile dysfunctioninclude diseases affectingbloodflow, such asatherosclerosis(hardening of thearteries); nerve disorders; psychological factors, such as stress,depression, andperformance anxiety(nervousness over their ability to sexually perform); and injury to thepenis. Chronic illness, certain medications, and a condition called Peyronie's disease (scar tissue in thepenis) can alsocause erectile dysfunction. Inhibited desire, or loss oflibido, refers to a decrease in desire for, or interest in sexual activity. Reducedlibidocan result from physical or psychological factors. It has been associated with low levels of the hormone testosterone. It also may be caused by psychological problems, such asanxietyanddepression; medical illnesses, such as diabetes and high blood pressure; certain medications, including some antidepressants; and relationship difficulties. To diagnose a man's sexual problem, the doctor likely will begin with a thorough history of symptoms. They may order other tests to rule out any medical problems that may be contributing to the dysfunction. The doctor may refer you to other doctors, including a urologist (a doctor specializing in the urinary tract andmale reproductive system), an endocrinologist (a doctor specializing in hormonal issues), a neurologist (a doctor specializing in disorders of the nervous system), sex therapists, and other counselors. Several tests can be used to evaluate the causes and extent of male sexual problems. They include: Many cases of male sexual dysfunction can be corrected by treating the underlying physical or psychological problems. Treatment strategies may include the following: The success of treatment for sexual problems depends on the underlying cause. The outlook is good for dysfunction that is related to a treatable or reversible physical condition. Mild dysfunction that is related to stress, fear, or anxiety often can be successfully treated with counseling, education, and improved communication between partners. While sexual problems cannot be prevented, dealing with the underlying causes of the dysfunction can help you better understand and cope with the problem when it occurs. There are some things you can do to help maintain good sexual function: Many men have a sexual problem from time to time. However, when the problems are persistent, they can cause distress for the man and their partner, and have a negative impact on their relationship. If you consistently experience sexual function problems, see your doctor for evaluation and treatment.  SOURCES: Hormone Health Network: "Decreased Libido." Mayo Clinic: "Delayed Ejaculation,” "Retrograde Ejaculation." FamilyDoctor.org: "Premature Ejacualation." National Kidney and Urological Diseases Information Clearinghouse: "Erectile Dysfunction." MedlinePlus: "Erectile Dysfunction,""Sexual Problems in Men." Absorption Pharmaceuticals, LLC. American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. American Association of Marriage and Family Therapy. UpToDate. American Urological Association. FDA. See pictures and get the facts. 13 things that can kill your sex drive. How to stop them from spreading. What are the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.