Picais the persistent eating of substances such as dirt or paint that have no nutritional value. TheHandbook of Clinical Child Psychologycurrently estimates that prevalence rates of pica range from 4%-26% among institutionalized populations. Research among non-institutionalized populations takes the form of individual case studies, making prevalence rates difficult to estimate. If pica is suspected, a medical evaluation is important to assess for possibleanemia, intestinal blockages, or potential toxicity from ingested substances. If symptoms are present, the doctor will begin an evaluation by performing a complete medical history andphysical exam. The doctor may use certain tests -- such as X-rays andbloodtests -- to check foranemiaand look for toxins and other substances in theblood, and to check for blockages in theintestinal tract. The doctor also may test for possible infections caused by eating items contaminated with bacteria or other organisms. A review of the person's eating habits may be conducted. Before making a diagnosis of pica, the doctor will evaluate the presence of other disorders -- such as intellectual disabilities, developmental disabilities, or obsessive-compulsive disorder -- as the cause of the odd eating behavior. This pattern of behavior must last at least one month for a diagnosis of pica to be made. Given the risk of medical complications (such as lead poisoning) associated with pica, close medical monitoring is necessary throughout treatment of the eating behavior. Additionally, close collaboration with a mental health team skilled in treating pica is ideal for optimal treatment of these complex cases. TheHandbook for Clinical Child Psychologycurrently supports general behavioral strategies as the most effective treatment approach for pica, with training in which foods are edible and which foods cannot be eaten through the use of positive reinforcement. There are many potential complications of pica, such as: Pica usually begins in childhood and typically lasts for just a few months. However, it is likely to be more difficult to manage in children who are developmentally disabled. There is no specific way to prevent pica. However, careful attention to eating habits and close supervision of children known to put things in their mouths may help catch the disorder before complications can occur.  SOURCES:Section of Behavior Medicine at the Children's Hospital at The Cleveland Clinic.Walker and M.C. Roberts (Eds.)The Handbook of Clinical Child Psychology(3rd Ed., 2001). New York: NY: John Wiley & Sons. Differences between feeling depressed or feeling blue. Signs of mania and depression. Causes, symptoms, and therapies. When food controls you. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.