Bulimiais a psychologicaleating disorderin which you have episodes of binge eating (consuming a large quantity of food in one sitting). During these binges, you have no sense of control over your eating. Afterward, you try inappropriate ways tolose weightsuch as: Bulimia, also called bulimia nervosa, tends to start in late childhood or early adulthood. You usually binge and purge in secret. You feel disgusted and ashamed when you binge, and relieved once you purge. People with bulimia usually weigh within the normal range for their age and height. But they may feargaining weight, want to lose weight, and feel very dissatisfied with their bodies. We don't know the exact cause ofbulimia. But research suggests that a mixture of certain personality traits, emotions, and thinking patterns, as well as biological and environmental factors, might be responsible. Researchers believe thiseating disordermay begin with dissatisfaction with your body and extreme concern with your size and shape. Usually, you have low self-esteem and fear becomingoverweight. The fact that bulimia tends to run in families also suggests that you might inherit a risk for the disorder. Other risk factors include:  Different people may have different symptoms of bulimia. You may notice changes in both your body and your behavior. Unlike the eating disorderanorexia, someone withbulimiamay not lose a lot ofweight, so it can be harder to tell what’s going on. Physical symptoms of bulimia can include: Behavioral symptoms of bulimia may include: If you or any member of your family has an unhealthy focus on weight and size and/or appears overly interested in food, call a doctor. The sooner you're treated, the better your chances for a successful outcome. Another reason to get prompt treatment is to avoid the serious problems bulimia can cause. They include: If your doctor thinks you might have bulimia, they'll probably ask you about your eating habits, if you've lost or gained weight, and whether you have any physical symptoms. They may also: You may also have other tests to rule out medical causes for weight loss or gain. To treat bulimia, your doctor will consider your physical and psychological needs. Your treatment may includecounselingandmedications. Often, it involves a team of medical, nutritional, andmental healthprofessionals. They'll try to help you restore your health and healthy eating patterns. Medical treatments Psychotherapy Nutritional therapy The goal is to teach you good eating habits. You work with a dietitian to learn to recognize your body's signals of hunger and fullness. They help you stabilize your weight and gain a healthier attitude toward food. Self-care for bulimia Along with following your treatment and therapy plan, you can take steps to care for yourself:  Bulimia is difficult to cure. Many people improve, but some may relapse from time to time. In addition, some people who are considered "cured" continue with less-than-normal eating patterns throughout their lives. But in general, the outlook for people with bulimia is more positive than the outlook for people withanorexia, another eating disorder. Because we don't know exactly why people get bulimia, it's hard to know how to prevent it. But there are ways to teach children and teens healthy attitudes and behaviors about food and body image. They include: Oncebulimiahas developed, prevention mostly focuses on trying to keep it from getting worse and harming a person's body and sense of self. This can be difficult, sinceeating disorderscan go on secretly for a long time before others suspect what is happening and intervene. The same is true for relapses during recovery. You might need to go back to the doctor if bulimia symptoms come back. Call your doctor if: Sometimes, people with bulimia havedepressionas well as their eating disorder. Call 911 if you or someone who has this condition are thinking about committingsuicide. You can also call the national suicide prevention hotline at 800-273-8255. SOURCES: American Psychiatric Association: "Eating Disorders." National Institute of Mental Health: "Eating Disorders," “Eating Disorders: About More than Food.” womenshealth.gov: "Bulimia nervosa fact sheet." National Eating Disorders Association: "Bulimia Nervosa," "Introduction to Nutrition Therapy," "Contact the Helpline." Mayo Clinic: "Bulimia nervosa." Cedars-Sinai: "Gastroparesis." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Frequently Asked Questions About Eating Disorders." National Association of Anorexia and Related Disorders: "Online Support Groups." Halmi, K.Eating Disorders: Anorexia, Bulimia, and Obesity. Yudofsky,Textbook of Clinical Psychiatry, 4th edition, 2003. Brewerton, T.Clinical Handbook of Eating Disorders: An Integrated Approach, Edition 1, Marcel Dekker, Inc, 2004. See how following fad diets can have lasting, harmful effects. Learn possible complications of the eating disorder. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.