The idea that you can be addicted to food has recently gained increasing support. That comes frombrainimaging and other studies of the effects ofcompulsive overeatingon pleasure centers in thebrain. Experiments in animals and humans show that, for some people, the same reward and pleasure centers of thebrainthat are triggered by addictive drugs likecocaineandheroinare also activated by food, especially highly palatable foods rich in: Like addictive drugs, highly palatable foods trigger feel-goodbrainchemicals including dopamine. Once you experience pleasure associated with increased dopamine transmission in your brain's reward pathway from eating certain foods, you may quickly feel the need to eat again. Reward signals from highly palatable foods may override your signals of fullness and satisfaction. As a result, you may keep eating, even when you're nothungry. Compulsive overeating is a type of behavioral addiction, meaning that you can become preoccupied with a behavior (such as eating, gambling, or shopping) that triggers intense pleasure. When you have food addiction, you lose control over your eating behavior and spend excessive amounts of time involved with food and overeating, or anticipating the emotional effects of compulsive overeating. You also may develop a kind of tolerance to food. That means that the more you eat, the less you're satisfied. Scientists believe that food addiction may play an important role in obesity. But you can still have food addiction if you don't have obesity. Your body may be genetically programmed to better handle the extra calories you take in. Or maybe you increase your physical activity to compensate for overeating. When you're addicted to food, you continue to eat despite negative consequences, such as weight gain or damaged relationships. And like people addicted to drugs or gambling, you have trouble stopping your behavior. Researchers at Yale University's Rudd Center for Food Science & Policy have developed a questionnaire that can help identify food addictions. To see if these apply to you, ask yourself if you: The questionnaire also asks about the impact of yourrelationship with foodon your personal life. Ask yourself if you: The questionnaire also asks about psychological withdrawal symptoms. For example, when you cut down on certain foods (excluding caffeinated beverages), do you have: The questionnaire also tries to gauge the impact of your food decisions on your emotions. Do these apply to you? Experts are working to understand and find treatments for food addiction. Some think its recovery may be more complicated than recovery from other kinds of addictions. Alcoholics, for example, can ultimately abstain from drinking alcohol. But people who are addicted to food still need to eat. A nutritionist,psychologist, or doctor who's educated about food addiction may be able to help you break your cycle of compulsive overeating. There are a growing number of programs that can help, too. Groups like Food Addicts in Recovery Anonymous are based on the 12-step program used for alcohol, drugs, and gambling addictions. Others, like Food Addicts Anonymous, use 12-step principles along with strict diets. They can help you avoid ingredients like sugar, refined flour, and wheat. Food addiction and binge eating disorder (BED) have some similarities, but they're also different. Unlike food addiction, BED involves often eating and compulsively eating large amounts of food in a short amount of time. You may feel guilt or shame afterward. BED may start in your teens or early adulthood as part of a cycle that involves a restrictive diet. You might begin a diet to lose weight but find that it’s too hard to stick to -- especially if you use food as a coping tool. You might reach a breaking point and binge on “forbidden” foods, then feel guilt and shame, and then resume the diet. Whether you're dealing with food addiction or BED,  talk to your doctor. They can refer you to a mental health specialist who can provide tools for managing your eating habits and help you figure out what works best for you. SOURCES: Yale University: "Yale Food Addiction Scale," "Food and Addiction." Helpguide.org: "Binge Eating Disorder." University of Rochester Medical Center: “Understanding Compulsive Overeating.” American Psychiatric Association: “Feeding and Eating Disorders.” Michelle May, MD, author,Eat What You Love, Love What You Eat. Marsha Hudnall, MS, RD, president, Green Mountain at Fox Run, Vermont. Robin B. Kanarek, PhD, professor of psychology, Tufts University. Avena, A.Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 2008. Hedebrand, J.Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, November 2014. Meule, A.Frontiers in Psychiatry, Nov. 3, 2011. Volkow, N.Trends in Cognitive Science, January 2011. Gearhardt, A.Archives of General Psychiatry, August 2011. Symptoms of binge eating disorder. Surprising health complications. Watch one person's story about living with this condition. Understanding the link. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.