Reactive attachment disorder (RAD) is a condition found in children who may have had grossly negligent care and don’t form healthy emotional attachments with their primary caregivers -- usually their mothers -- before age 5. Attachment develops when a child is repeatedly soothed, comforted, and cared for, and when the caregiver consistently meets the child's needs. It is through attachment with a loving and protective caregiver that a young child learns to love and trust others, to become aware of others' feelings and needs, to regulate their emotions, and to develop healthyrelationshipsand a positive self-image. The absence of emotional warmth during the first few years of life can negatively affect a child's future. RAD can affect every aspect of a child's life and development. When babies and young children have RAD they may: When children get older their RAD tends to take on two patterns, inhibited and disinhibited. Common symptoms with inhibited RAD include: Common symptoms with disinhibited RAD include: RAD develops when attachment between a young child and their primary caregiver doesn’t happen or is interrupted due to grossly negligent care. This can happen for many reasons, including: Other risk factors for RAD include these home and parental situations: It’s hard to know exactly how many children have RAD, since many families never seek help. However, it’s generally believed that RAD is uncommon. As with adults, mental disorders in children are diagnosed based on signs and symptoms that suggest a particular condition. If a child has symptoms, the doctor may do a complete medical history andphysical exam, including a review of the child’s developmental milestones. There are no lab tests to diagnose RAD, but the doctor may use various tests to see what may be causing the symptoms. Tests may include neuroimaging orbloodtests, to see if physical illness ormedicationmight be causing symptoms. If the doctor can’t find a physical cause for the symptoms, they will likely refer the child to a child and adolescent psychiatrist orpsychologist. Thesemental healthprofessionals are specially trained to diagnose and treat mental illnesses in children andteens. They’ll assess the child to rule out other causes for their unusual behavior, such as autism spectrum disorder. Psychiatrists and psychologists use specially designed interview and assessment tools to evaluate children for mental disorders. They base their diagnoses on what they’ve been told about the symptoms, and on observation of children’s attitudes and behaviors. Treatment of RAD has two important goals. The first is to ensure that the child is in a safe environment. This is especially important in cases where the child has been abused or neglected. The second goal is to help the child develop a healthy relationship with an appropriate caregiver. Treatment for RAD often focuses on the caregiver. Counseling may help address issues that are affecting the caregiver's relationship with -- and behavior toward -- the child. Teachingparentingskills also can help improve the relationship and develop attachment. Treatment may also include play therapy. This technique allows the child and the caregiver to express their thoughts, fears, and needs in the safe context of play. There is no medication to treat RAD itself. However, the doctor may sometimes use medication to help manage severe behavioral symptoms, such as explosive anger or problems sleeping. The use of so-called holding therapies and "rebirthing" techniques is controversial. There’s no scientific evidence to support the effectiveness of such interventions and some evidence that indicates that it is actually not safe. Recognizing a problem with attachment and getting help as soon as possible are essential to preventing RAD. It may not always be possible to prevent RAD, but doing these things may help stave off its development: If not treated, RAD can have a negative impact on a child's physical, emotional, behavioral, social, and moral development. Children with RAD generally are at higher risk for: With treatment, it is possible for children with RAD to learn to trust others, and to lead healthy and productive lives. SOURCES: American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry: "Reactive Attachment Disorder." MedlinePlus: "Reactive attachment disorder of infancy or early childhood." Cleveland Clinic: “Reactive Attachment Disorder,” “Reactive Attachment Disorder: Diagnosis and Tests,” “Reactive Attachment Disorder: Management and Treatment.” Mayo Clinic: “Reactive Attachment Disorder.” Differences between feeling depressed or feeling blue. Signs of mania and depression. Causes, symptoms, and therapies. When food controls you. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.