Meralgia paresthetica is a condition that causes numbness,pain, or a burning feeling in your outer thigh. You might also hear it called Bernhardt-Roth syndrome. It happens when there’s too much pressure on or damage to one of the nerves in your leg, specifically the lateral femoral cutaneous nerve (LFCN). In most cases, there are simple ways to treat the condition, such as wearing looser clothing. Some people with more severe meralgia paresthetica may needmedicationor surgery. With the right treatment and enough time to recover, you can ease your symptoms and feel better. Usually, you’ll notice the warning signs of meralgia paresthetica only on one side of your body. You might feel: Your symptoms may be mild at first, but as the condition gets worse, you might feel sharper, shooting pain. It may go away and come back for no clear reason. Nerves travel throughout your body, carrying messages to and from yourbrain. A certain set of nerves, called the sensory nerves, gather and send signals to your brain about yourskin, muscles, and other tissues. If you have meralgia paresthetica, a large sensory nerve in your outer thigh doesn’t have enough room to pass through your hip bone or joints. This may be due to swelling, trauma, or increased pressure in this area. A lot of things can squeeze or damage the nerve, including: Your risk of getting the condition is higher if you: Your doctor will give you aphysical examand ask about your symptoms and your medical history -- especially about any recent injuries or surgeries. The doctor will touch your leg to find the affected area. They will check for any neurological abnormalities of the lower leg. You may get certain medical tests: It can be hard to tell the difference between meralgia paresthetica and other back, hip, or groin conditions. Be patient as you work with your doctor to find the right diagnosis. The goal of treatment is to ease the pressure on your nerve. The type of therapy you get depends on the cause of your condition. Lifestyle changes and home care For mild cases, your doctor may recommend: Physical therapy You may work with a physical therapist on stretching and strengthening exercises for your leg muscles or abs. They may also try phonophoresis, which usesultrasoundto help your body absorb a medication through your skin, or transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS), which delivers electrical impulses through pads applied to your skin to block pain. Medications If your condition is more severe, you may need: Your doctor may recommend surgery to ease pressure on the nerve if no other treatment helps. It can take some time for your pain to go away. Some people will still feel numbness even after treatment. In most cases, though, you should be able to recover within 4 to 6 weeks.  SOURCES: Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Meralgia Paresthetica.” NYU Langone Medical Center: “Meralgia Paresthetica.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Burning Thigh Pain (Meralgia Paresthetica).” UCLA Neurosurgery: “Meralgia Paresthetica: Conditions.” UpToDate: “Meralgia paresthetica (lateral femoral cutaneous nerve entrapment.” Mayo Clinic: “Meralgia paresthetica.” Cleveland Clinic: “Meralgia Paresthetica.” National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Meralgia Paresthetica Information Page.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.