Melanomais a type ofskin cancer. When it spreads to other places in your body, it's called metastatic, or advanced. You may also hear your doctor refer to it as stage IVmelanoma. Melanoma often spreads to: Although in many cases metastatic melanoma can’t be cured, treatments and support can help youlive longerand better. Doctors have therapies that have greatly increased survival rates. And researchers are working to find newmedicationsthat can do even more. Remember: You still have control over the decisions you make about your treatment and your life. It's important to have people you can talk to about your plans, your fears, and your feelings. So find support and learn about your treatment options. That will help you make the most of your life. In most cases, melanoma is caused by exposure to ultraviolet (UV)radiationfrom the sun or tanning beds. It damages the DNA of your skin cells, and they start to grow out of control. You can get the disease on parts of your body that don't get sunlight, though, like the palms of your hands and the retinas of youreyes. You're more likely to get melanoma if you have: If your melanoma has spread to other areas, you may have: Before you have any tests, your doctor will want to know: If you haven’t already been diagnosed with melanoma, your doctor will do a skin exam. If they think you may have skin cancer, you'll need abiopsyto find out. You usually get one of three types: A doctor will look at the growth under a microscope to see how thick it is. Usually, a thicker tumor means there is a higher risk the cancer will spread. If you've been diagnosed with melanoma, you may also have abloodtest and an imaging test to see if it has spread to other areas. There are different types of imaging tests: The doctor will also check to see if your lymph nodes are enlarged. Lymph nodes are bean-sized glands under the skin in your neck, underarms, and groin. The doctor uses a thin needle to remove a sample of cells. This is called a fine-needle aspiration biopsy. The doctor may also do a lymph node biopsy. This removes the lymph nodes most likely to have cancer cells. In this test, the doctor injects a dye into the area where the potential cancer was. It spreads to the nearest lymph nodes, which are removed and tested. If these lymph nodes, called sentinel nodes, don't have cancer, then it's likely the cancer hasn't spread. The results of these tests help the doctor determine the stage of your cancer and how widespread it is. You and your doctor will decide on the best treatment plan once you know that information. Although metastatic melanoma is not easy to treat, you do have options. Choosing what's right for you will depend on where and how big the cancer is, what your health is like, and what your wishes are. Since most cases of metastatic melanoma can't be cured, the goals of treatment are to: Treatment used to be mainly radiation andchemotherapy. Now there are newer drugs available that can work better, studies show. Your treatment may include: Surgery.Your doctor may remove tumors or lymph glands. Although surgery alone probably won't cure the cancer, it can help you live longer and have fewer symptoms. Your doctor will likely also use one or more other treatments. Radiation andchemotherapy.These can help some people, depending on the size and location of the cancer. Immunotherapy.These drugs boost your immune system so it can better attack the cancer. You get immunotherapy through an IV or a shot in high doses. It can have serious side effects, but it can also shrink metastatic melanomas and help some people live longer. These drugs include: Researchers are studying many other drugs that spur the immune system to fight melanoma. Targeted therapy.This kind of treatment aims to kill cancer cells without harming healthy ones. They may work for people who have certain changes in genes. Because these treatments target the tumors, they may cause fewer side effects thanchemotherapyor radiation. Some drugs attack a gene called BRAF. About half the people who have melanoma have changes in this gene, which helps cancer cells grow. If you have a tumor with BRAF, these drugs may shrink it and extend your life. They include: Vemurafenib (Zelboraf) Other drugs block an enzyme called MEK. This enzyme is often overactive in some cancers. These drugs, working in combination with a BRAF inhibitor to attack cancer cells, seem to shrink tumors for a longer period of time: Hearing that your cancer has spread is scary, but a lot of research is underway to find new treatments. And there are treatments available to try to stop the disease from spreading, so you can live longer. It's important to have support and to talk about your fears and feelings, too. Your doctor can help you find a cancer support group. These tips may help you feel better during melanoma treatment: Although stage IV melanoma is hard to treat, each case is different, and some people will respond very well to treatment. Talk to your doctor about all your options, and find out more about clinical trials to see if one is right for you. The Melanoma Research Foundationhas an online library of free support services, including an online patient community and a phone buddy program. And for more information on metastatic melanoma, go to the web site of the Skin Cancer Foundation. If you are interested in more advanced reading on this topic, we’ve made content from our health professional site, Medscape, available to you on WebMD. Learn More Photo Credit: Mid Essex Hospital Services NHS Trust / Science Source SOURCES: American Cancer Society: "Melanoma Skin Cancer Overview," "Treatment of melanoma sin cancer by stage,” "Targeted therapy for melanoma skin cancer." Cancer Research UK: "Living with Advanced Melanoma." FDA: "FDA approves Yervoy to reduce the risk of melanoma returning after surgery," "FDA approves Cotellic as part of combination treatment for advanced melanoma." Macmillan Cancer Support: "Symptoms of advanced melanoma." National Cancer Institute: "What You Need to Know About Melanoma and Other Skin Cancers." Skin Cancer Foundation: "Melanoma." UCSF Medical Center: "Melanoma." Medscape: “Some Melanoma Patients Living for up to 10 Years After Ipilimumab.” UpToDate: "Melanoma treatment; advanced or metastatic melanoma (Beyond the Basics)." American Cancer Society. News release, FDA. National Organization for Rare Disorders  – Photo Caption American Cancer Society – Photo Caption What you need to know. For healthy blood cells. Separate fact from fiction. Symptoms, screening tests, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.