Every parent knows babies and smallchildren sleepand drink a lot. But if your child is suddenly much drowsier or thirstier than usual, it could be a symptom oftype 1 diabetes. It used to be calledjuvenile diabetesbecause most of the people who got it were young children. Your child could gettype 1 diabetesas aninfant, or later, as atoddleror a teen. Most often, it appears after age 5. But some people don’t get it until their late 30s. Know the symptoms oftype 1 diabetesso you can help keep your child healthy. It’s not the same as “classic” ortype 2 diabetes, which is often linked toobesityand seen in adults (but it can occur in children too, usually after age 10). If your child has type 1 diabetes, it means theirpancreas-- an organ in the upper-right side of the belly -- makes little or noinsulin. The condition is anautoimmune disorder, which means it happens when the body’s defense system attacks and destroys cells that makeinsulin. Symptoms of type 1diabetesin infants and children can start very suddenly. Keep an eye out for these signs in your baby or child:  Type 1diabetesmay cause sudden, extreme swings inblood sugarthat can be dangerous. If you notice any of thesymptoms of diabetesin your child, it’s important to get them aphysical examas soon as possible, so their doctor can begin treatment right away. The doctor will do a simpleurine testto check for glucose (sugar) in the urine and a finger stick to measure preliminary blood glucose level. A more involved test, called anoral glucose tolerance test, can tell for certain if it’s type 1 diabetes. Your child will need to follow a special diet before this procedure. If your child has already been diagnosed with type 1 diabetes, call your doctor if you notice any of these signs of alow blood sugaremergency: Low blood sugarcan be life-threatening to children with type 1 diabetes. Always call 911 or get emergency medical help if your child ever passes out or hasseizures. SOURCES Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International: “Warning Signs of Type 1 Diabetes.” Palmetto Health Children’s Hospital: “Warning Signs of Diabetes in Children.” Joslin Diabetes Center: “What is Type 1 Diabetes?” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.