Milk thistle(silymarin) is a flowering herb related to the daisy and ragweed family. It is native to Mediterranean countries. Some people also call it Mary thistle and holy thistle. People have traditionally used milk thistle for problems with theliverandgallbladder. Experts believe silymarin is the primary active ingredient of the herb. Silymarin is an antioxidant compound taken from milk thistle seeds. It’s unclear what benefits, if any, it may have in the body, but it’s sometimes used as a natural treatment for things includingcirrhosis,jaundice,hepatitis, andgallbladderdisorders. Some claim milk thistle may also: There’s conflicting research on the benefits of milk thistle forliverhealth. It may have protective effects on theliver, preventing damage. There’s some evidence that milk thistle can treatcirrhosisand chronichepatitis, which can be caused byalcohol abuse,autoimmune disease, or viruses. But experts say that the evidence isn’t conclusive. Some studies also show milk thistle may help people whose liver is damaged by industrial toxins, such as toluene and xylene. There is not enough scientific data to say whether or not milk thistle can help liver problems. Get the facts onmilk thistle for the liver. Medical research suggests that milk thistle, combined with traditional treatment, can improvediabetes. Studies have shown a decrease in blood sugar levels and an improvement incholesterolin people withtype 2 diabetes. Researchers also have found that milk thistle improvedinsulin resistance, a key part oftype 2 diabetes. Talk to your doctor before taking any supplements because they might interfere with yourmedication. Learn more aboutnatural remedies for type 2 diabetes. By loweringLDL"bad"cholesterol levels, milk thistle may lower the chance of developingheart disease. But studies on heart benefits have only been done in people with diabetes. People with diabetes often have high cholesterol. It’s unclear if milk thistle has the same effects in people without diabetes. Milk thistle can also be taken with cholesterol-lowering medications, like statins. It can help prevent elevation of liver enzymes, which can be a side effect of the medication. Find out more onthe side effects of statins. The best doses of milk thistle have not been established for any condition it may be used to treat. Quality and active ingredients in supplements may vary widely from maker to maker. This makes it very hard to establish a standard dose. Ask your doctor for advice. People sometimes eat the stem and leaves of milk thistle in salads. There are no other food sources of this herb. Risks.Milk thistle can trigger allergic reactions. People who are allergic to artichokes, kiwi, ragweed, daisies, marigolds, and chrysanthemums are at higher risk. People who havediabetesorendometriosisshould check with a doctor before using milk thistle. While milk thistle has been traditionally used inpregnantandbreastfeedingwomen, its safety is unknown. If you’re pregnant orbreastfeeding, check with your doctor before using milk thistle. Milk thistle is not recommended for children. Side effects.Milk thistle seems to have few side effects, even when taken for several years. Some people havenausea,diarrhea,itching, andbloating. Interactions.If you take any medicines regularly, talk to your doctor before you start using milk thistle. It could interact with many drugs, including some that treat high cholesterol,infections,insomnia, and blood pressure. Since milk thistle may lowerblood sugar, people withdiabetesshould check with their doctor before taking the herb as it may make their blood sugar fall too low. SOURCES: Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database: "Milk Thistle Monograph." National Center of Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCCAM): "Milk Thistle," “Herbs at a Glance: Milk thistle.” Medicinenet.com: "Generic Name: Milk Thistle – Oral." Longe, J., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, second edition, 2004. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center: “About Herbs: Milk thistle.” Natural Standard Patient Monograph: “Milk thistle.” Era of Hope Meeting for the Department of Defense Breast Cancer Research Program, Atlanta, June 8-11, 2000. Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.