Molluscum contagiosumis a common viralskin infection. It most often affects children, but adults with weakened immune systems can get it, too. Molluscum contagiosum causes either single or multiple raised, pearl-like bumps (papules) on theskin. It’s a chronic infection, so the bumps may last for a few months or a few years. But most cases get better in 6 to 9 months. Molluscum contagiosum papules commonly appear on the face, trunk, and limbs of children and on the genitals,abdomen, and inner thighs of adults. The condition usually causes bumps that: Molluscum contagiosum usually disappears on its own over a period of months to years if you have ahealthy immune system. If you haveAIDSor other conditions that affect theimmune system, molluscum contagiosum can lead to widespread, chronic sores. Molluscum contagiosum is caused by the molluscum contagiosum virus. It’s part of the pox virus family. You can spread molluscum contagiosum:  A diagnosis of molluscum contagiosum is based on the way the papule looks. If your doctor isn’t sure, they can confirm the diagnosis with a skinbiopsy. They’ll remove a piece of skin to look at more closely. If they’re worried you might have other health problems, they can check for them, too. Because molluscum contagiosum can go away on its own, you may not need treatment. But the doctor can remove individual bumps by scraping or freezing them. This procedure could leave a scar. Topicalmedications(medications you put on your skin), like those used to removewarts, can also help remove the papules. To prevent molluscum contagiosum, follow these tips:  Photo Credit: Richard Usatine, MD SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology. Mayo Clinic: “Molluscum contagiosum.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – Photo Caption Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.