Morning sicknessis nausea and vomiting that happens duringpregnancy. More than half of pregnant women havenausea and vomiting, especially during the first trimester. Despite its name, you can have morning sickness at any time of day. It doesn't mean yourbabyis sick, and it doesn't hurt the baby. Pregnancy nausea is probably caused by the sudden increase of hormones in your body. It's usually mild and goes away about midway through your pregnancy. Some women never feel nauseated during their pregnancy. Some women get a severe form of morning sickness calledhyperemesis gravidarum. This happens when severe nausea and vomiting leads todehydrationor causes the woman to lose more than 5% of her pregnancybody weight. Sometimes, she may not get enough nutrients, leading to malnourishment. The woman may have to stay in the hospital to get fluids,medication, and rarely, afeeding tube. General symptoms of morning sickness include: Call your doctor if you:  Experts aren’t sure, but pregnancy hormones may cause nausea. In the case of severe nausea and vomiting, there could be another medical condition that isn’t related to pregnancy. Things that may make you more likely to have morning sickness include: You’re at higher risk of hyperemesis gravidarum if:  Diagnosing morning sickness is based on your signs and symptoms. If your doctor suspects you have hyperemesis gravidarum, they may also orderurineorbloodtests. For moderate to severe morning sickness, your doctor may recommend: To treat hyperemesis gravidarum, you may need to stay in the hospital and get: You can also try some of these home remedies:  SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians: "Morning Sickness." American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: "Morning Sickness." U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health: "Pregnancy: Body Changes and Discomforts." Mayo Clinic: “Morning Sickness.” National Health Service, U.K.: “Vomiting and morning sickness in pregnancy.” Journal of Perinatal Medicine:“First trimester β-hCG and estradiol levels in singleton and twin pregnancies after assisted reproduction.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.