The ancient Greeks and Romans knew about motion sickness. Even NASA has made note of it. So if you have this common ailment, you’re part of a long tradition. There are ways to prevent or treat it to keep your travels or trip to the amusement park a pleasant one. You get motion sickness when there are conflicts among your senses. Say you’re on a ride at the fair, and it’s spinning you around and upside down. Your eyes see one thing, your muscles feel another, and your inner ears sense something else. Your brain can’t take in all those mixed signals. That’s why you end up feeling dizzy and sick. Your innerears, in particular, help control your sense of balance. They are part of a network called the vestibular system. This system includes three pairs of semicircular canals and two sacs, called the saccule and the utricle. They send information about what’s going on around you to thebrain. The semicircular canals hold a fluid that moves with the turns of your head. The saccule and utricle are sensitive to gravity. They tell thebrainwhether you’re standing up or lying down. Yourbraintakes in all this data, and it usually comes together and makes sense. But sometimes your brain gets confusing signals. On a flying plane, for example, you feel like you’re moving, but youreyestell your brain that you don’t appear to be going anywhere. The opposite is true as well. After a long sea voyage, you can stand still on dry land but still feel like you’re moving. The result is the same: motion sickness. Anybody can get motion sickness, but it’s most common in children andpregnantwomen. Unlike acold, you can’t spread it to other people. It’s not contagious. Motion sickness can strike quickly and make you break out in acoldsweat and feel like you need to throw up. Other common symptoms include: In addition, some people getheadaches, feel verytired, or have shallowbreathing. For most people, symptoms usually don’t last long. They often go away once you get used to the situation, whether it’s the rocking of a boat or the movement of a train. But there are some simple things you can do if the motion sickness isn’t going away on its own: If you can, get a seat over the wing if you’re flying, an upper-deck cabin if you’re sailing, or a front-seat spot if you’re in a car. Some people feel like they get relief with these: Rawginger.There’s some scientific proof that this root, long used as a folk remedy to fightnausea, is effective. But it may act as ablood thinner. Talk to your doctor first before you use it. Mint.Eating peppermint is thought to calm the body. At the very least, the aroma may soothe you. Acupunctureandacupressure.Some people say that stimulating a certain point just below the wrist helps ease theirnausea. If you’re still bothered by motion sickness, you can talk to your doctor about these: Dimenhydrinate(Dramamine).This over-the-counterantihistamine, used to easeallergies, helps with motion sickness, too. The first dose should be taken about an hour before traveling. More doses are taken every 4 to 6 hours. Scopolamine(Maldemar).This is a prescriptionmedication. Your wear a patch behind theear. You apply it 4 hours before needed. A dose lasts 3 days. Other drugs include: All have side effects, including drowsiness anddry mouth. Motion sickness usually goes away once the journey is over. But if you’re still dizzy, have aheadache, continue to vomit, noticehearing lossorchest pain, call your doctor. SOURCES: National Center for Biotechnology Information:Neurology, “What the ancient Greeks and Romans knew (and did not know) about seasickness.” NASA.gov: “Mixed Up in Space.” Vestibular Disorders Association: “The Human Balance System.” National Health Service (NHS.uk): “Motion Sickness.” Neuroscience Online: “Vestibular System: Structure and Function.” University of Maryland Medical Center: “Motion Sickness.” CDC: “Travelers’ Health: Motion Sickness.” Virtual Pediatric Hospital: “Motion Sickness.” Mayo Clinic: “Motion Sickness: First Aid.” Better Health Channel of Victoria State Government: “Motion Sickness.” American Journal of Physiology, Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology:“Effects of ginger on motion sickness and gastric slow-wave dysrhythmias induced by circular vection.” Cleveland Clinic: “What You Need to Know About Seasickness or Motion Sickness.” Integrative Medicine: “Self-Care: Acupressure Point P6: Pericardium 6 or Nei Guan.” MedlinePlus.gov: “Scopolamine Transdermal Patch,” “Dimenhydrinate.” American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery: “Dizziness and Motion Sickness.”  Things to try at home to help ease the pain. Allergies or earwax buildup may be to blame. Learn what to do. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.