Myelodysplastic syndromesare a rare group of disorders in which your body no longer makes enough healthyblood cells. You might sometimes hear it called a “bone marrow failure disorder.” Most people who get it are 65 or older, but it can happen to younger people, too. It is more common in men. The syndromes are a type ofcancer. Some cases are mild while others are more severe. It varies from person to person, depending on the type you have, among other things. In the early stages of MDS, you may not realize anything is even wrong. Eventually, you may start to feel verytiredand short of breath. Other thanstem celltransplants, there is no proven cure for MDS. But there are a number of treatment options to control symptoms, prevent complications, help you to live longer, and improve the quality of your life. Your bones obviously support and frame your body, but they do more than you might realize. Inside them is a spongy material called bone marrow, which makes different types ofblood cells. They are: Your bone marrow should make the right number of these cells. And these cells should have the correct shape and function. When you have myelodysplastic syndrome, your bone marrow isn't working the way it should. It makes low numbers of blood cells or defective ones. About 12,000 Americans get different types of myelodysplastic syndrome each year. The chances of getting it become higher as you age. Some other things that raise your chance of getting MDS include: Cancertherapy:You can get this syndrome 1 to 15 years after receiving certain forms ofchemotherapyorradiation. You may hear your doctor or nurse call this "treatment-related MDS.” You might be more likely to get MDS after treatment for acute lymphocyticleukemiain childhood,Hodgkin's disease, or non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Cancerdrugslinked to MDS include: Tobacco:Smokingalso raises your chance of getting MDS. Benzene:This chemical with a sweet odor is widely used to make plastics, dyes, detergents, and other products. Too much contact with this chemical is linked to MDS. Inherited conditions:Some conditions passed on from your parents increase your chances of having myelodysplastic syndrome. These include: Blood diseases:People with various disease of the blood have a greater chance of getting MDS. They include: Often, myelodysplastic syndromes cause no symptoms early in the disease. But its effect on different types of blood cells can cause warning signs that include: Call your doctor if you have these symptoms and concerns about MDS. To figure out whether you have one of the myelodysplastic syndromes, your doctor will ask you about your symptoms and history of other health problems. They might also: Several conditions are considered to be types of myelodysplastic syndrome. Doctors consider a number of things when figuring out which kind of MDS a person has. These include: How many types of blood cells are affected.In some types of myelodysplastic syndrome, only 1 kind of blood cell is abnormal or low in number, such as red blood cells. In other kinds of MDS, more than 1 type of blood cell is involved. The number of "blasts" in the bone marrow and blood.Blasts are blood cells that didn't mature fully and don’t work properly. Whether the genetic material in the bone marrow is normal.In one type of MDS, the bone marrow is missing a portion of a chromosome. The type of myelodysplastic syndrome you or a loved one has will determine the progress of the disease. With some types, you’re more likely to developacute myeloid leukemia. Also called AML, it’s when your bone marrow makes too much of a certain type of white blood cell. It can get worse quickly if it’s not treated. With most types of MDS, the chance of leukemia is much lower. Your doctor can talk to you about the specific type of myelodysplastic syndrome you have and how it's likely to affect your health and life. Other things that affect your case include: Your doctor will decide on a treatment for your myelodysplastic syndrome that depends on the type of MDS you have and how severe it is. You and your doctor may just take awatchful waitingapproach. Your doctor might just want to do regular check-ups if your symptoms are mild and your blood counts are holding up OK. Other times, you might get what your doctor may call a “low-intensity treatment.” These may include: Finally, you might need a “high-intensity treatment.” SOURCES: National Cancer Institute: "General Information About Myelodysplastic Syndromes." American Cancer Society: "Myelodysplastic Syndromes." DeAngelo, D, Myelodysplastic Syndromes: Biology and Treatment, in Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice, Saunders Elsevier, 2013. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: "What is Fanconi Anemia?" National Library of Medicine: "Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome," "Severe Congenital Neutropenia." Ferri's Netter Patient Advisor: "Managing your myelodysplastic syndrome." Nemours (KidsHealth.org): “About Down Syndrome.” NIH. U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Bloom syndrome,” “Ataxia-telangiectasia,” “Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria,” “Severe congenital neutropenia.” American Cancer Society: “Benzene and Cancer Risk.” What are they and why do we need them? See it in pictures, plus read the facts. Fight cancer one plate at a time. Do you know the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.