Nasopharyngeal canceris a rare type of head and neckcancer. It starts in the upper part of your throat, behind the nose. This area is called the nasopharynx. The nasopharynx is precariously placed at the base of your skull, above the roof of yourmouth. Your nostrils open into the nasopharynx. When you breathe, air flows through your nose into your throat and nasopharynx, and eventually into yourlungs.   Nasopharyngeal cancer is also called nasopharyngealcarcinoma(NPC). Scientists are not sure what exactly causes nasopharyngeal cancer. However, thecancerhas been strongly linked to the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Although EBV infection is common, not everyone who has EBV will get nasopharyngeal cancer. In the U.S., most people who have had an EBV infection never have long-term problems. Scientists are still researching how EBV leads to nasopharyngeal cancer, but it may be related to genetic material (DNA) from the virus affecting the DNA in the cells of the nasopharynx. The change in DNA causes cells to grow and divide abnormally, causingcancer. The risk for NPC goes up if you eat a diet rich in salt-cured fish and meat.Tobaccoand alcohol may also increase the risk, although their link to NPC is not clear. Some scientists believe that chemicals in these things further damage the DNA in cells. Fewer than one in every 100,000 people in the U.S. gets this type ofcancer, according to the American Cancer Society. The cancer is most common in southern China and southeast Asia. It is also much more common in: In the U.S., nasopharyngeal cancer has also been seen in African-Americans, Hispanics, and white people. You are more likely to get this type of cancer if you: Some, but not all, studies have found a higher risk of nasopharyngeal cancer in people who: Symptoms of nasopharyngeal cancer may include: Keep in mind, such symptoms are more likely to occur with many other diseases and health conditions that are far less serious than nasopharyngeal cancer. If you have any of the above symptoms, see your doctor. Only an experienced medical person can diagnose or rule out nasopharyngeal cancer. Your doctor will ask you questions about your symptoms, medical history, and family history, and perform a physical exam. This includes a detailed look at your ears, nose, and throat. You may be sent to a doctor who specializes in these areas, called an otolaryngologist. The doctor or nurse will also feel your neck. Most patients with nasopharyngeal cancer have a lump in the neck. This is a sign that the cancer is spreading to the lymph nodes. A flexible, lighted tube may be placed through yourmouthor nose to help the doctor better view the nasopharynx. This is called a nasopharyngoscopy. It helps the doctor check the area for abnormal growths, bleeding, or other problems. If the exam is abnormal, your doctor may recommend abiopsy. A biopsy is the removal of a small amount of tissue for examination under a microscope. A biopsy may be taken during the nasopharyngoscopy. If there is a lump in your neck, the biopsy may be done by placing a very thin, hollow needle into the lump. Imaging tests can help spot nasopharyngeal cancer or determine if it has spread. Imaging tests may include: The following tests may also be performed: If you are diagnosed with nasopharyngeal cancer, other tests will be done to determine if and where the cancer has spread. This is called staging. Nasopharyngeal cancer is staged from Stage 0 (the earliest stage) to Stage IV (the most advanced stage). The lower the number, the less the cancer has spread to other parts of the body. If you are diagnosed with nasopharyngeal  cancer, you will need regular follow-ups with your medical team before, during, and after treatment. Your treatment will depend on many things, including: Treatment may include: Radiation Therapy. Radiation therapy uses X-rays to kill cancer cells and stop them from growing. It is usually part of the standard treatment for early stage nasopharyngeal cancer. One type called IMRT delivers high-dose radiation directly to the tumor while minimizing damage to nearby healthy tissue. It may cause fewer side effects or complications than conventional radiation treatment to the nasopharynx, which can lead to: Chemotherapy.Chemotherapyuses drugs to kill cancer cells. By itself, it is not usually helpful for treating nasopharyngeal cancer. But it may help youlive longerwhen combined with radiotherapy or biological drugs. Surgery. Surgery to remove the tumor is not often performed because of the tumor's location near nerves and blood vessels. It may cause permanent damage to theeyeand other nearby structures. Not all people with nasopharyngeal cancer can have surgery. Your doctor will consider the location and stage of your tumor when discussing your treatment options. Biologic drugs. Biologic drugs affect how your body's immune system fights disease. They include monoclonal antibodies such as cetuximab (Erbitux), pembrolizumab (Keytruda), and nivolumab (Opdivo). Biologics work differently than chemotherapy drugs and may be used more often in cases of advanced or recurrent cancer. Palliative therapy. The goal of palliative treatment is to control symptoms related to cancer and cancer treatment and make you as comfortable as possible. Clinical trials. If treatment does not work, consider joining a clinical trial. Researchers are always testing new ways to treat cancer, and they need your help. Ask your doctor or nurse if there are any clinical trials on nasopharyngeal cancer in your area. Many cases of nasopharygeal cancer are not preventable, but taking these steps may help lower your risk of nasopharyngeal cancer:  SOURCES: American Cancer Society web site: "Nasopharyngeal Cancer." National Cancer Institute web site: "Nasopharyngeal Cancer." Cummings, C.W., Flint, P.W., Haughey, B.H., editors.Otolaryngology: Head & Neck Surgery.5th ed., Mosby Elsevier, 2010. Carey, W.D., editor,Cleveland Clinic: Current Clinical Medicine 2010, 2nd ed., Saunders Elsevier, 2010. American Society of Clinical Oncology: "Nasopharyngeal Cancer." Abeloff, M.D., Armitage, J.O., Niederhuber, J.E., Kastan, M.B., McKenna, W.G., editors,Abeloff’s Clinical Oncology, 4th ed., Elsevier Churchill Livingstone, 2008. Hui, E.P., Chan, A.T.C., Le, Q-T. "Treatment of early and locoregionally advanced nasopharyngeal carcinoma," UpToDate version 19.2; September 2011, last updated Nov. 14, 2011. Colin S Poon, MD, PhD, FRCPC, Kerstin M Stenson, MD, "Overview of the diagnosis and staging of head and neck cancer," 2019 Edwin P Hui, MD, Anthony TC Chan, MD, "Epidemiology, etiology, and diagnosis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma," 2019 What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.