Is it hard to see distant objects, like highway signs, until you’re a few feet away, but easy to read a book up close? Chances are you’re myopic, also known asnearsighted. It’s a pretty common condition that your eye doctor usually can fix witheyeglasses, contacts, oreyesurgery. The structure of youreyeis toblame. When your eyeball is too long or the cornea -- the protective outer layer of your eye -- is too curved, the light that enters your eye won’t focus correctly. Images focus in front of the retina, the light-sensitive part of your eye, instead of directly on the retina. This causes blurredvision. Doctors call this a refractive error.  Highmyopia: It’s a more serious form of the condition, where the eyeball grows more than it is supposed to and becomes very long front to back. Besides making it hard to see things at a distance, it can also raise your chance of having other conditions like adetached retina,cataracts, andglaucoma. Degenerative myopia: Also called pathological or malignant myopia, it is a rare type you usually inherit from your parents. Your eyeball gets longer very quickly and causes severe myopia, usually by the teenage or early adult years. This type of myopia can get worse far into adulthood. Besides making it hard to see things at a distance, you may have a higher chance of having a detached retina, abnormalbloodvessel growth in the eye (choroid neovascularization), andglaucoma. Chances are the only symptom is that more distant objects are blurred. You may also notice: Aneye examcan show you if you’re myopic. Glasses, contacts, or refractive surgery can usually correct the problem. When you have myopia, your prescription for glasses orcontact lenseswill be a negative number. The more negative the number, the stronger your lenses will be. For example, -3.00 is stronger than -2.50. Your prescription helps the eye focus light on your retina. That clears up yourvision. Eye surgery can improve your vision so much you may no longer need to wear glasses or contacts. The most common procedures for myopia are: In the case of high myopia, special contacts or atropine eyedrops have been found to be effective in slowing the progression. In some cases, your doctor may suggest cataract or clear lens replacement surgery. Myopia runs in families and will probably start in childhood. Multifocal lens (glasses or contacts) and eye drops such as atropine, pirenzepine gel, or cyclopentolate can help slow the progression. Your eyes usually stops changing after your teenage years, but not always. The incidents of myopia have been rising at an alarming rate in recent years. If you notice changes in yourvision, get youreyeschecked. See your eye doctor every year.  SOURCES: Yanoff, M; Duker, J.Ophthalmology, Mosby, 2008. National Eye Institute: "Facts About Refractive Errors," "Facts About Myopia." Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.