Neuromyelitis optica, or NMO,  is also called neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and Devic disease. It is a disease that affects youreyesand spinal cord. It's not very common -- only about 4,000 people in the United States have it. NMO happens because your body's immune system attacks healthy cells in your central nervous system (yourbrainand your spinal cord). These attacks can happen over days or weeks -- this is called monophasic NMO. Or you may go a long time between attacks, even months or years. This is called relapsing NMO. With relapsing NMO, symptoms go away but can come back and get worse over time. Men and women are equally likely to get the monophasic type, but women get relapsing NMO much more often than men. Children also can get the disease. The signs of NMO fall into two categories. See your doctor if you have any of these symptoms: Children who have NMO may seem confused, haveseizures, or fall into acoma. Another condition that also causes inflammation and can make it hard to move ismultiple sclerosis(MS). Doctors used to think NMO was a type of MS. Now research shows they're different: Doctors aren't sure what causes NMO. It doesn't seem to run in families, but many people who have it also have otherautoimmune diseases, in which your body mistakenly attacks healthy cells. Or they may have family members who have them. Some examples of autoimmune diseases aretype 1 diabetes,rheumatoid arthritis,psoriasis, andvitiligo. Your doctor will examine you and check your thinking,vision, speech, strength, and reflexes. They may want to test fluid from yourspineand your blood. More than 70% of people who have NMO have a certainproteinin their blood called an antibody. Your doctor also may want to look at yourspineto see if it's inflamed. One way to do that is with a test called an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). It uses a large magnet and a computer to create an image of your spinal cord. You also might need to see a doctor who specializes in treating eyes (ophthalmologist) and have an optical coherence tomography (OCT) to check for damage to the optic nerve. There's no cure for NMO, but there are medicines and other treatments that can help ease your symptoms, including: Drugs to prevent attacks.The FDA has recently approved three drugs to treat it.Eculizumab(Soliris),inebilizumab-cdon(Uplizna), andsatralizumab-mwge(Enspryng) work by targeting the defective antibodies that attack the healthy cells in your body, triggering NMO. Your doctor may prescribe you other drugs to suppress your immune system. Steroids.Your doctor will likely give yousteroidsor corticosteroids that help with inflammation. Otherdrugsmay help keep your body from fighting off the good cells and prevent future attacks. You'll get them into a vein in your arm through an IV. Plasma exchange. Calledplasmapheresis., this removes harmful antibodies from the blood. A machine separates the different parts of your blood, then your plasma is replaced with a substitute. After that, the new blood is put back into your body. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic -- Diseases and Conditions: "Devic's Disease." Guthy-Jackson Charitable Foundation: "NMO Fact Sheet," "NMO Patient Resource Guide." Mayo Clinic: "Neuromyelitis Optica." National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: "Understanding Autoimmune Diseases." National Multiple Sclerosis Society: "Neuromyelitis Optica." National Organization for Rare Diseases: "Neuromyelitis Optica." Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.