Neurofibromatosisis a genetic disorder of thenervous system. Tumors form on your nerve tissues. Mainly, neurofibromatosis disorders affect the growth and development of nerve cell tissue. The disorders are known as neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2). NF1 is the more common type of neurofibromatosis. Schwannomatosis has recently been identified as a third and more rare type of neurofibromatosis, but doctors don’t know much about it yet. You may also hear NF1 called Recklinghausen disease, von Recklinghausen disease, von Recklinghausen’s phakomatosis, von Recklinghausen’s neurofibromatosis, neurofibroma (multiple), neurofibromatosis-pheochromocytoma-duodenalcarcinoid syndrome, or peripheral neurofibromatosis. It causes multiple café au lait spots (patches of tan or light brown skin) and neurofibromas (soft, fleshy growths) on or under yourskin. It can also cause enlarged or deformed bones and curvature of thespine(scoliosis). Occasionally, tumors may develop in the brain, on cranial nerves, or on the spinal cord. About 50% to 75% of people with NF1 also havelearning disabilities. NF2 is also called bilateral acoustic neurofibromatosis, vestibular schwannoma neurofibromatosis, or central neurofibromatosis. It’s much less common than NF1 and is characterized by multiple tumors on the cranial and spinal nerves. Tumors that affect both of the auditory nerves andhearing lossbeginning in theteensor early 20s are generally the first symptoms of NF2. Neurofibromatosis 1 (NF1) symptoms The following symptoms appear in people with NF1: Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) symptoms People with NF2 often display the following symptoms: Schwannomatosis symptoms People with schwannomatosis may have the following symptoms:  Neurofibromatosis is often inherited (passed on by family members through your genes). But about 50% of people newly diagnosed with the disorder have nofamily historyof the condition. That’s because it can result from a sudden mutation (change) in your genes. Once this change takes place, you can pass the mutant gene on to future generations. Mutations that lead to neurofibromatosis include:  Neurofibromatosis is diagnosed using a number of tests, including: To receive a diagnosis of NF1, you must have two of the following features: To be diagnosed with NF2, you must have: or Schwannomatosis diagnosis is based on these criteria:  There’s no cure for neurofibromatosis. Treatments focus on controlling symptoms. There’s no standard treatment for NF, and many symptoms, such as café au lait spots, do not need treatment. When treatment is necessary, options may include:  Neurofibromatosis complications may vary from person to person. They typically stem from a growing tumor pressing against your nerve tissue or an internal organ. Possible NF1 complications include: Possible NF2 complications include: One possible schwannomatosis complication is severe pain that requires specialist medical treatment or even surgery. Your outlook depends on the type of NF you have. Often, the symptoms of NF1 are mild, and people who have it are able to lead full and productive lives. Sometimes, pain and deformity can lead to significant disability. The NF2 outlook depends on your age at the start of the disease and on the number and location of tumors. Some can be life-threatening. Photo Credit (inset, neck): Richard Usatine, MD Photo Credit (inset, close-up): Science Photo Library / Science Source Photo Credit (inset, armpit): ©DermNet NZ / www.dermnetnz.org 2022 SOURCES: Ferri, F.Ferri's Clinical Advisor, 1st edition, Mosby, 2013. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Neurofibromatosis Type 2 -- Information and Services. Mayo Clinic: “Neurofibromatosis.” Genetics Home Reference: “Neurofibromatosis type 1.” American Association of Neurological Surgeons: “Neurofibromatosis.” Children’s Tumor Foundation: “Schwannomatosis.” Mayo Clinic – Photo Caption Cleveland Clinic – Photo Caption Medline Plus / National Library of Medicine – Photo Caption American Association of Neurological Surgeons – Photo Caption DermNet NZ – Photo Caption DBpedia – Photo Caption Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.