People with neutropenia have an unusually low number of cells called neutrophils. Neutrophils are cells in your immune system that attack bacteria and other organisms when they invade your body. Neutrophils are a type of whitebloodcell. Your bone marrow creates these cells. They then travel in your bloodstream and move to areas of infection where they ingest and then neutralize the offending bacteria. Neutropenia itself often doesn't cause symptoms. In some cases, people only learn they have neutropenia when they have a blood test for an unrelated reason. It is most commonly seen--and even expected--as a result ofchemotherapyused to treatcancer. But some people may have other symptoms from infection or the underlying problem causing the neutropenia. Infections can occur as a complication of neutropenia. They occur most often in the mucous membranes, such as the inside of the mouth and theskin. These infections can appear as: Feveris also a common symptom of infection. In a neutropenic fever, it is common not to identify the exact cause, which is often normal gut bacteria that has made its way into the blood from weakened barriers. Neutropenic fevers are usually treated with antibiotics, even if an infectious source can't be identified. This is important because the weakened immune system means patients can get very sick very quickly. The risk for serious infection generally increases as: The causes of neutropenia include: Causes of decreased production of neutrophils include: Infections that can cause neutropenia include: Increased destruction of neutrophils can be due to viral infections or medications used to treat autoimmune disorders targeting neutrophils for destruction. This may be related to conditions such as: In some people, neutropenia can be caused by certainmedications, such as:  When deciding on treatment, health care providers consider the cause and severity of the neutropenia. Mild cases may not need any treatment. Approaches for treating neutropenia include: People with neutropenia often need to take special steps to prevent infections. These neutropenia precautions include:  SOURCES: Young, N.Clinical Hematology, 1st edition, Mosby, 2005. Goldman's Cecil Medicine, 24th edition, Saunders, 2011. Hoffman, R.Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice, 5th edition, Churchill Livingstone, 2008. American Cancer Society: "Infections in People With Cancer." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.