Do you know whether to take yournitroglycerintablets before, during, or afterchest pain? And are there times when you shouldn’t take it at all? Doctors usually prescribe nitroglycerin foranginapectoris, which often is called just "angina." It’s suddenheart-related chest pain. It happens because something prevents the flow ofbloodto yourheartmuscle. Nitroglycerin helps widen thebloodvessels so more blood gets to your heart muscle. That helps stop the pain. Your doctor may give you instructions to take your nitroglycerin before you have angina. That means taking it before activities that are more likely to cause it. For example, you might take it 5 to 10 minutes before you go for a bike ride. You might also take it before: You may take your nitroglycerin when you first feel the symptoms of angina. It’s important to know your own body and what angina is like for you. You may have: If you have angina, take your nitroglycerin as instructed by your doctor. This might mean you take it as soon as you feel symptoms, or you wait a minute before you take it, or you take more than one pill over several minutes. If you take your nitroglycerin as instructed and you still have chest pain, get medical help right away. As with any medicine, nitroglycerin might be harmful if you don’t take it correctly. You should not take nitroglycerin if: Men with heart disease and other long-term health problems are more likely to have erectile dysfunction (ED) or trouble with erections. There are medicines that help men who have ED. You or your partner may take one of them. Prescription ED pills include: Why shouldn’t you take your ED medicine with your nitroglycerin? The reason is that both lower your blood pressure. Taken together, your blood pressure may get to a very low, and dangerous, level. Because of this effect, the American Heart Association warns against it. You may still be able to take both medicines, at different times. Talk with your doctor about how long you should wait between taking the two medicines. For example, you may have to allow 24 to 48 hours or more between taking your ED medicine and nitroglycerin SOURCES: Graboys, T.Cardiology, Sept. 16, 2003. Hambrecht, R.Cardiology, June 4, 2013. Amsterdam, E.Journal of the American College of Cardiology, published online December 23, 2014. Boden, W.Drug Design, Development and Therapy, published online August 19, 2015. Cleveland Clinic Center for Continuing Education: “Erectile Dysfunction.” Harvard Health Publications: “Harvard Men's Health Watch: Which drug for erectile dysfunction?” Schwartz, B.Circulation, published online July 6, 2010. Warnica, J.Angina Pectoris, Cardiovascular Disorders, Merck Manual Professional Version, Merck & Co., Inc. 2016. Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.