Most people who havelung cancerhave NSCLC. Although it's serious, treatment can sometimes stop it from getting worse. There are things you can do to help you feel better, too. People who smoke or who breathe a lot of smoke are most likely to get NSCLC. Many of them are over 65. There are four kinds of NSCLC tumors: The treatments your doctor suggests will depend on how far your lungcancerhas spread. Doctors aren't sure exactly what causes this disease. Many people who get it have smoked or been around smoke. Other things that makelung cancermore likely are: It can also run in families. You may not notice symptoms in the early stages. Or you might mistake them for another illness, such aspneumoniaor acollapsed lung. Like othertypes of lung cancer, symptoms can include: If thecancerspreads to other parts of the body, you may have: First, your doctor will talk with you and ask questions like: They'll also give you aphysical exam. You will need tests, too. Imaging testshelp your doctor find tumors inside your lungs. They can also show whether thecancerhas spread. Sputum cytologyis a lab test that checks the mucus youcoughup forcancercells. Fine-needle aspirationbiopsytakes cells from an abnormal growth or the fluid in your lungs. Your doctor may want to look inside your lungs and chest using a thin, flexible tube with a light and tiny camera. They may also take samples of tissue, including from nearby lymph nodes, to check forcancercells. They can do this a few different ways: Bronchoscopygoes through your nose ormouthand into your lungs. Endobronchial ultrasounduses bronchoscopy with an ultrasound placed at the tip of the tube to look at lymph nodes and other structures. Endoscopic ultrasoundis like the endobronchial ultrasound, but your doctor puts theendoscopedown your throat into theesophagus. Thoracoscopyuses a few small cuts along your side to look at the outside of your lung and the tissue around it. Mediastinoscopymakes a small cut just above your breastbone, in the space between your lungs. Based on what your doctor finds, they'll assign a stage, describing where thecanceris. That will help your medical team figure out the best treatment for you. You’ll want to know what each stage means: Finding out that you have cancer is overwhelming. You may want to start by asking your doctor: Ask a friend or family member to go with you to your appointments for emotional support and to help you understand what the doctor tells you. You may feel more comfortable getting a second opinion before deciding on your treatment plan. Doctors treat this kind of lung cancer in two ways: They target the cancer itself, and they try to make you feel better. Their goal is to stay ahead of the symptoms and make you as comfortable as possible. Your doctor may suggest a combination of treatments, depending on what kind of cancer you have and where it is. Surgery. If you’re in an early stage, your doctor will probably recommend surgery to take out the cancer. You could have a part or all of your lung removed. Other types of surgery destroy cancer cells by freezing them or using a heated probe or needle. Radiation. It can kill cancer cells that remain after surgery. It also treats certain cancers that your doctor can't get rid of with surgery. The radiation comes either from a high-energy beam aimed at the cancer from outside of your body using a special machine, or from a radioactive substance put inside your body in or near the cancer. Chemotherapy. Whether you get it as pills or with a needle in a vein or muscle, the drugs travel throughout your body to kill the cancer. Your doctor might put it in your spinal fluid, a specific organ, or a space inside your body to target cancer cells in that area. You could getchemobefore surgery to make a tumor smaller, after surgery, or both, or even if you don't have surgery. Targeted therapy. These drugs and antibodies stop cancer cells from growing and spreading in very specific ways. Because of how they work, they usually harm normal cells less than radiation andchemo. Laser and photodynamic therapy (PDT). This technique uses a special laser light to "turn on" special drugs that cancer cells have absorbed. This kills them and helps avoid damage to healthy tissue. Clinical trials. Scientists are studying new ways to treat cancer. Check the National Cancer Institute's web site and ask your doctor if a clinical trial would be a good fit for you, what you should consider, and how to sign up. Let your doctor know if you have any pain or shortness of breath. There are treatments for that so you can feel better. As you follow your treatment plan, pay attention to any changes you feel. Tell your doctor how you’re doing, both physically and emotionally. Some days, your appetite may not be great. But you'll need to eat well to keep your strength and energy up. Try to eat several small meals throughout the day instead of a few large ones. If you havetrouble breathing, oxygen from a tank may help. So can practicing relaxation techniques, likemeditation, listening to music, or picturing yourself in a peaceful place. Complementary treatments, including gentlemassageandaromatherapy, may put you more at ease. Talk to your doctor about what you can do when you're tired, in pain, or breathless. Finding out that you have cancer is very hard to deal with. You may be afraid, angry, or sad. Strong emotions are normal. A support group or a counselor who works with people who have cancer could help you work through your feelings. Look online or in your community, or ask your doctor for suggestions and about other professionals who can help support you -- perhaps social workers, nurses, clergy, or other doctors. If it's caught early enough, your cancer may be curable. Even if it's not, your treatment should help youlive longerand feel better. Throughout your treatment, you can make choices about what's best for you. The Lung Cancer Alliancecan help you find other people and families near you who have also faced this disease. Their support can make it easier to live with NSCLC. SOURCES: College of American Pathologists: "Lung Cancer: Lung Adenocarcinoma." National Cancer Institute: "General Information About Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer," "Eating Problems and Ways To Manage Them," "Your Feelings: Learning You Have Cancer." Medscape: "Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Treatment & Management." University of Southern California: "A Patient's Guide to Lung Surgery." Johns Hopkins Medicine Health Library: "Mediastinoscopy." LungCancer.org: "Types and Staging of Lung Cancer." Medline Plus: "Radiation Therapy." American Cancer Society: "Photodynamic Therapy," "Managing symptoms of advanced cancer, by location," "Lung Cancer (Non-Small Cell)," "Caring for the Patient With Cancer at Home." UpToDate: "Patient information: Non-small cell lung cancer treatment; stage I to III cancer (Beyond the Basics)." Do you know the myths from the facts? Tips to managing them. See it in pictures, plus read the facts. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.