Uveitis, also known asiritis, means you haveinflammation-- heat, redness,pain, and swelling -- in one or both of youreyes. It can causevision loss, but it can be treated. See youreyedoctor as soon as you notice a problem. If you get treatment early, you can ease your symptoms and protect yourvision. Uveitis gets its name from the uvea, the middle layer of youreye. It includes the iris (the colored part). Theinflammationcan also affect other parts of youreye, like the lens or retina. Adults between 20 and 60 years old are most likely to get it. How it affects you depends a lot on the cause and how quickly you get treated. You might only have minor problems with your sight. Or it could cause seriousvision loss. You might have it for a short time or for many years. It could return again and again. Left alone, it can turn into seriouseyesighttroubles, likeglaucomaorcataracts. There are two types: Infectious uveitis can result from a bacteria or virus in your eye. Noninfectious uveitiscan result from an eye injury or a disease somewhere else in your body. The uvea has a lot ofbloodvessels, so if yourimmune systemis fighting off a problem in one area, the cells and chemicals it makes can travel through your bloodstream and enter your eye. That causes inflammation. If you have one of these conditions, you’re more likely to get uveitis: In some cases, doctors don’t know what causes noninfectious uveitis. It can affect one or both eyes. Symptoms may come on quickly. If you notice any of these, see an eye doctor right away: You’ll need to see an eye doctor. They’ll give you aneye examand ask you questions about your symptoms, like: During theeye exam, the doctor will: They may also dobloodtests, X-rays, or other lab tests to check for medical conditions that might be linked to uveitis. It's important to treat uveitis right away so it doesn’t permanently scar your eye or lead to other serious problems, likeglaucomaorcataracts. Your doctor may give yousteroideye drops to ease the swelling, redness, and pain. Steroid shots or pills are other options. In addition the doctor may ask you to take eye drops like atropine which dilate your pupil and prevent painful spasm of your eye. This can make your vision blurry and sensitive to light. Doctors can treat some types of the condition with a small capsule that slowly releases steroids inside your eye. This is usually a treatment for long-lasting cases. Many of these cases are in just one eye. But with this treatment, you can be more likely to getcataractsor glaucoma. The surgery to put the capsule in your eye won’t require a hospital stay. If your doctor recommends this option, ask them what you can expect. If you take oral steroids for a long time, you may have side effects, like cataracts,stomachulcers, bone thinning (your doctor will call this osteoporosis),diabetes, andweight gain. Ask them how the treatment may affect you. Other options includedrugsthat turn down yourimmune system. Your doctor will refer to them as immunosuppressants. Or you could get drugs to boost your body’s own response to inflammation. The doctor might call them biologics. They don’t get prescribed often, but your doctor may choose them if steroids haven't helped you. If you take them, you’ll get regular blood tests and doctor’s appointments to make sure they aren’t causing any side effects. Treatment will help ease any eye pain and swelling you may have, but keep your doctor informed about any discomfort or changes in your vision. If your uveitis was caused by another medical condition, you’ll need to make sure you get the right treatment for it as well. It all depends on what the root cause is and how quickly you get treatment. You may have one bout of uveitis, or it may come back again and again. Whatever the case, medicines can help ease pain, restore vision, and stop damage to your eye. SOURCES: All About Vision: "Uveitis, Iritis and Eye Inflammation." EyeSmart: "Uveitis Causes," "Uveitis Diagnosis," "Uveitis Symptoms," "Uveitis Treatment," "What is Uveitis?" Medscape Multispecialty: "A Systematic Review of Biologics for the Treatment of Noninfectious Uveitis." Medscape: "Iritis and Uveitis." National Eye Institute: "Facts About Uveitis." Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.