Noonan syndromeis a rare genetic disorder. If you have it, you might have certain identifiable facial features, short height, and unusual chest shape. You may also haveheartdefects. It can cause a wide range of other physical and developmental symptoms that usually start at birth. There’s no cure for it, but doctors can treat some of the symptoms as they happen. Noonan syndrome is caused by a genetic defect. Scientists have identified four genes involved in the syndrome: PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, and KRAS. There are two ways you can get this syndrome: There are many symptoms, and they may be mild, moderate, or severe. Head, Face, andMouth Bones and Chest Heart Most babies with Noonan syndrome are also born withheart disease. They may have: Blood Puberty Other Symptoms Before yourbabyis born, your doctor might consider that he has Noonan syndrome if apregnancy ultrasoundshows: Your doctor might also suspect Noonan syndrome if you have abnormal results on a specialized prenatal test, called a maternal serum triple screen. Most of the time, they’ll know yourbabyhas this condition at birth or shortly after by examining them. But sometimes, it’s hard to recognize and diagnose. There isn’t one. But your doctor will prescribe treatments for your baby’s symptoms or complications. For example, growth hormones may help with growth problems. If you have Noonan syndrome, you may wonder if your future children will have it. That depends on your family’s history If one of your parents has the condition, they have a 50% chance of passing it on to you. But if you have Noonan syndrome and no one else in your family had it, the defective gene may have started with you. Doctors call this a “de novo mutation.” In this case, your chances of passing it along to a future child are very small -- less than 1%. If you’re concerned, see a genetic specialist. They can run tests to spot mutations that happen with this syndrome, and help confirm whether your child has it or not. SOURCES: National Organization of Rare Disorders: “Noonan Syndrome.” National Human Genome Research Institute: “Learning About Noonan Syndrome.” Genetics Home Reference: “Noonan Syndrome.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.