A normal period (or normalmenstruation) is different for every woman. Each month, one of your ovaries releases an egg. Meanwhile, your uterus gets ready to help yourbabygrow if that egg gets fertilized. If it does, you’repregnant. If it doesn’t, your body sheds the lining of your uterus through yourvagina. That’s your period. It happens, on average, every 28 days. Think about how old you were when you got yourfirst period. Now think about how old you may be when you enter menopause. Your body and life will change a lot from one to the other, right? So does your menstrual cycle. When it comes to periods, "normal" covers a lot of ground. Use the broad range of factors below as a guide. And remember: The only true normal is what's normal for you. Every month, your entire body prepares toget pregnant. Your ovaries release an egg. Hormones rise and fall. This is your menstrual cycle. It starts on the first day of your last period and ends on the first day of your next period. Though the average cycle is 28 days long, anything between 21 and 45 days is considered normal. That's a 24-day difference. For the first year or two after menstruation begins, women tend to have longer cycles that don't start at the same time every month. Older women often have shorter, more consistent cycles. If you're onbirth control pillsor have anIUD, it can change the timing of your period. Ask your doctor what's normal for your form ofcontraception. How long your period lasts also varies. The time from the first sign ofbloodto the last is usually in the 3-to-5-day range. Any length from 2 days to a week is normal for a period. If the egg your ovary releases every month isn't fertilized, the lining of your uterus sheds through yourvagina. This is your period. The amount of blood that comes out of your body is called your menstrual flow. Whether your flow is light, moderate, or heavy, it's all considered normal. Some months, yourbreastsmay feel tender when you have your period. Other months, you may noticebloatingaround yourabdomenor mood swings. Other normal menstruation symptoms include: Not every period is the same, though. Most of the time, an irregular or abnormal period isn’t serious. But you should call the doctor if:  In just 3 months, you can get a picture of what’s normal for you by tracking your periods. Keep a record of:  SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: "Menstrual cycle: What's normal, what's not." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Menstrual Cycle: An Overview." Cleveland Clinic: "Menstrual Cycle," “Normal Menstruation.” Womenshealth.gov: "Menstruation and the menstrual cycle," “Normal Menstruation.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.