You may feel like youreyeshave a mind of their own. They move up and down, side to side, or in a circle. This is callednystagmusor "dancingeyes." It's a condition where you can't control youreyemovements. It may be a sign of another eye problem or medical condition. You may be born with it, or you might develop it later in life. Nystagmus is caused by many different things, including: Sometimes, your doctor may not know what causes it. Your eyes move without your control. It might be fast, then slow, then fast again. The movement might be in one eye, but it's usually in both eyes. You may notice that you nod your head or keep it in strange positions. You do that because it helps you focus when you can't hold your gaze steady. Things look clearer when you tilt or turn your head. Objects may seem a little blurry to children with nystagmus. But the world doesn't look shaky to them. It's different if you develop the condition as an adult. Then the world appears to move a little when you look around. Nystagmus may also affect yourvision. You might have a hard time seeing in the dark, or you may be sensitive to bright light. You may have problems with balance anddizziness. These can be worse if you're tired or stressed. If you think you or your child may have symptoms of nystagmus, see your eye doctor. They’ll look at the insides of your eyes and test yourvision. They’ll also look for othereye problems. You might get other tests, including: Your doctor may ask you to spin around in the chair for about 30 seconds, stop, and then try to stare at an object. If you have nystagmus, your eyes will first move slowly in one direction. Then they'll move quickly the other way. If you developed nystagmus as an adult, there may be simple things you can do to lessen its effects. Sometimes you may just have to stop a medicine or quit drinking alcohol or taking drugs. Wear the right contacts or glasses to improve vision. It won't cure nystagmus, but it can help with other eye problems that can make it worse. Eye muscle surgery may be an option. The goal is to help with the head tilt that often comes with nystagmus. Sometimes surgery improves vision, too. Some drugs may ease symptoms in adults but not children. These include the anti-seizure medicinegabapentin(Neurontin), the muscle relaxantbaclofen(Lioresal), andonabotulinumtoxina(Botox). For people who are verynearsighted,LASIKor Visian ICL can help improve eyesight. The surgeon may advisw you to take relaxation medication before the procedure to lessen the nystagmus. There are things you can do at home to make it easier to deal with your "dancing eyes." Use large-print books and turn up the print size on your computer, tablet, and phone. More lighting may help with vision, too. If your child has nystagmus, encourage them to use their eyes. Big and brightly colored toys are easiest to use. Choose toys that make noise and have unique textures. Let your child hold books close to their eyes with their head tilted. Let them wear a hat or tinted glasses -- even indoors -- to reduce glare. Talk to your child's teacher to make things easier at school. It would be hard for them to share books or papers. Let them choose where to sit so they can see the board and the teacher. SOURCES: Akron Children's Hospital: "Information About Congenital Nystagmus." EyeSmart, American Academy of Ophthalmology: "What is Nystagmus?" "Nystagmus Causes," "Nystagmus Symptoms," "Nystagmus Diagnosis," "Nystagmus Treatment." American Optometric Association: "Nystagmus." American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus: "Nystagmus." Medscape: "Congenital Nystagmus." American Nystagmus Network: "Nystagmus Frequently Asked Questions," "Information for Parents of School Children with Nystagmus." Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.