Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is amental illnessthat causes repeated unwanted thoughts or sensations (obsessions). It also can give you an urge to do something over and over again (compulsions). Some people have both obsessions and compulsions. OCD isn’t about habits likebiting your nailsor thinking negative thoughts. An obsessive thought might be that certain numbers or colors are “good” or “bad.” A compulsive habit might be towash your handsseven times after touching something that could be dirty. Although you may not want to think or do these things, you feel like you can't stop. Everyone has habits or thoughts that repeat sometimes. People with OCD have thoughts or actions that: OCD comes in many forms, but most cases fall into at least one of four general categories: [Self-Test] Do You Have Symptoms of OCD? Many people who have OCD know that their thoughts and habits don’t make sense. They don’t do them because they enjoy them, but because they can’t quit. And if they stop, they feel so bad that they start again. Obsessive thoughts can include: Compulsive habits can include: Doctors aren’t sure why some people have OCD.Stresscan make symptoms worse. It’s a bit more common in women than in men. Symptoms often appear inteensor young adults. OCD risk factors include: Sometimes, a child might have OCD after a streptococcal infection. This is called pediatric autoimmune neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcal infections, orPANDAS. What Causes the Compulsion to Wash? Experts believe OCD is caused by an abnormality in the brain's circuitry.Brainscans showbrainactivity is different in people with OCD. There's probably a genetic component too, especially when OCD begins in childhood. Of all adults with OCD, 1/3 to 1/2 say their illness started in childhood or adolescence. Why is someone with the disease compelled to wash, as opposed to check or count or hoard? That's not known. It's true that with all types of OCD, you may act out a compulsion to relieveanxietyproduced by an obsessive, intrusive thought. Your doctor may do aphysical examandbloodtests to make sure something else isn’t causing your symptoms. They will also talk with you about your feelings, thoughts, and habits. There’s no cure for OCD. But you may be able to manage how your symptoms affect your life through medicine, therapy, or a combination of treatments. Treatments include: The Role of Family Members Families often make the mistake of enabling loved ones with OCD. For instance, a person who sees their partner cleaning the house 3 or 4 hours a day may at first think they've got the world's greatest partner. But that same person may later see their partner is irritable, exhausted, and their cleaning patterns are bizarre. So they may ask whether they think there's an issue. The partner may agree to get treatment because the person spoke up. In this way, family members can play an important role in supporting a person with OCD. They may steer a loved one toward a diagnosis or help with treatment. They may participate in therapy. There are also support groups for people who have a loved one with OCD. Some separate conditions are similar to OCD. They involve obsessions with things like: SOURCES: National Institute of Mental Health: “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: When Unwanted Thoughts or Irresistible Actions Take Over” and “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” Mayo Clinic: “Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Symptoms and Causes;” “Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Diagnosis and treatment;” and “Cognitive behavioral therapy.” American Psychiatric Association: “What is Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder?” International OCD Foundation: “What is OCD?” “How is OCD Treated?” “Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS),” “Disorders Related to OCD.” NYU Langone Child Study Center: “Habit Reversal Therapy: An Approach to Managing Repetitive Behavior Disorders.” OCD-UK: “The Different Types of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” American Psychological Association: “What Is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy?” American Family Physician: “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Diagnosis and Management.” Indian Journal of Psychological Medicine: “Antipsychotics and OCD: Boon or Bane?” BMC Psychiatry: “Atypical antipsychotic augmentation in SSRI treatment refractory obsessive-compulsive disorder: a systematic review and meta-analysis.” CDC: "Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder in Children." National Alliance on Mental Illness: “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.” Beyond OCD: "Help for Families Living with OCD." Mary Guardino, executive director, Freedom From Fear, Staten Island, N.Y. Obsessive-Compulsive Foundation. Differences between feeling depressed or feeling blue. Signs of mania and depression. Causes, symptoms, and therapies. When food controls you. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.