 Oral cancerappears as a growth or sore in the mouth that does not go away. About 50,000 people in the U.S. get oral cancer each year, 70% of them men. Oral cancer includes cancers of the lips,tongue, cheeks, floor of themouth, hard and soft palate,sinuses, and pharynx (throat. It can be life-threatening if not diagnosed and treated early. When it is caught early, oral cancer is much easier for doctors to treat. Yet most people get a diagnosis when their condition is too advanced to treat effectively. If you see your dentist or doctor regularly and learn how to spot suspicious changes, you’ll have a much better shot at an early diagnosis. The most common symptoms of oral cancer include:  If you notice any of these changes, contact your dentist or health care professional immediately. According to the AmericanCancerSociety, men face twice the risk of developing oral cancer as women. Men who are over age 50 face the greatest risk. It's estimated that over 50,000 people in the U.S. received a diagnosis of oralcancerin 2019. Risk factors for the development of oralcancerinclude: It is important to note that over 25% of all oral cancers occur in people who do not smoke and who only drink alcohol occasionally. The overall 5-year survival rate for patients with an early diagnosis of oral cavity and pharynx cancers is 84%. If the cancer has spread to nearby tissues, organs, or lymph nodes, the 5-year survival rate drops to 65%. As part of your routine dental exam, your dentist will conduct an oral cancer screening exam.  Your dentist knows what a healthy mouth should look like and probably has the best chance of spotting any cancer. Experts recommend getting checked every year starting at age 18, and sooner if you startsmokingor having sex. More specifically, your dentist will feel for any lumps or irregular tissue changes in your neck, head, face, and oral cavity. When examining your mouth, your dentist will look for any sores or discolored tissue as well as check for any signs and symptoms mentioned above. A biopsy may be needed to determine the makeup of a suspicious-looking area. There are different types of biopsies and your doctor can determine which one is best.  Many doctors don’t use brush biopsies because while they're very easy, they still need a scalpel biopsy to confirm the results if the brush biopsy is positive.  Also there are different types of scalpel biopsies, incisional and excisional, depending whether only a piece or the whole area is needed to determine what the nature of the problem is.  Some doctors perform these biopsies with lasers. Oral cancer is treated the same way many other cancers are treated -- with surgery to remove the cancerous growth, followed byradiation therapyand/orchemotherapy(drug treatments) to destroy any remaining cancer cells. Scientists think that oralcancerstarts when theDNAin the cells inside your mouth gets damaged. But some things, including your health habits, can make you more likely to get it. To prevent oral cancer: You can take an active role in detecting oral cancer early, should it occur, by doing the following: SOURCES: National Institutes of Health. National Cancer Institute. Cancer.net: "Oral and Oropharyngeal Cancer: Statistics." Mayo Clinic: “Mouth Cancer: Symptoms and Causes.” CDC: “HPV and Men,” “HPV and Oropharyngeal Cancer.” National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research: “Oral Cancer,” “Oral Cancer: Causes and Symptoms and the Oral Cancer Exam.” Oral Cancer Foundation: “HPV/Oral Cancer Facts,” “Screening,” “Oral Cavity.” American Society of Clinical Oncology: “HPV and Cancer.” Mount Sinai Hospital: “Can I Get Cancer from Oral Sex?” Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.