Oral lichen planusis a long-lasting disease that affects yourmouthwith symptoms such as white patches, redness, and swelling. It doesn't go away, but you can keep it under control. It’s not contagious, but anybody can get it. Women are more likely to have it than men. It's most common in people older than 40. But kids and young adults can also get it. Doctors aren't sure what causes oral lichen planus, but several things could play a part:  Some things can set off the condition for the first time, or they can trigger it if you already have the condition. These include:  What is certain is that you can’t pass it to anyone else and you didn't catch it from someone. Symptoms can come on slowly or start all at once. You may start out with: Then you may see: These sores may burn and be painful. They’ll likely hurt the most when you eat or drink foods that are spicy, salty, acidic (orange juice,tomatoes), or alcoholic. Crispy treats and drinks withcaffeinecan also cause problems. Your doctor can diagnose oral lichen planus by taking a small piece ofskinfrom inside your mouth. This is called abiopsy. They’ll run tests on it in the lab to see what the problem is. You may also needbloodtests to rule out other conditions. If you feel only a slight roughness in your mouth, you may not need treatment. If you’re inpainor have sores, your doctor may suggest a corticosteroid cream. In rare cases, they might prescribesteroidpills. If your doctor suspects your immune system is causing your symptoms, they may suggest amedicationthat turns down its normal response. These include:  Watch what you eat and drink. Certain foods and drinks -- especially spicy or citrus ones -- can make your symptoms worse. Hot or cold foods and drinks can also make you more uncomfortable. Stresscan also make things worse. Get rid of any problems that could trigger oral lichen planus or make it worse: You also need to keep track of your symptoms and tell your doctor about any changes in your mouth. There's a slight chance that oral lichen planus can lead tooral cancer. Make sure to get a screening for oral cancer every 6 to 12 months. It's also important to enjoy adietrich in fruit and vegetables. If you smoke, quit. Don't drink large amounts ofalcohol. See your doctor regularly to look for any changes in your mouth. SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology: "Lichen planus." American Academy of Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology: "Lichen Planus." British Dental Health Foundation: "Lichen planus." Medscape: "Oral Lichen Planus." National Association for Rare Disorders: "Lichen Planus." The American Academy of Oral Medicine: "Oral Lichen Planus." Mayo Clinic: “Oral Lichen Planus.” Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.