Ovarian cysts are solid or fluid-filled pockets in or on your ovary. They’re common, especially in women who arepregnantor who haven’t gone through menopause yet. Most of the time, they’re painless and harmless. You might get one every month as part of yourmenstrual cycleand never know it. They usually go away on their own without treatment. A cyst becomes a problem when it doesn’t go away or gets bigger. It can become painful. There’s also the possibility ofcancer, but it’s rare. The chances go up as you get older Most ovarian cysts are small and don’t cause any problems. When there are symptoms, you might have pressure,bloating, swelling, orpainin one side of your lower belly. This pain may be sharp or dull, and it can come and go. Sometimes, a cyst needs emergency attention. See your doctor right away if you have: These things could mean your cyst has caused the ovary to twist. Most cysts are “functional.” They’re a part of your monthly cycle. Others are nonfunctional. In some women, their ovaries make a lot of small cysts. This condition is calledpolycystic ovary syndrome(PCOS). It can make it hard toget pregnant. Other nonfunctional cysts may be caused by cancer. Ovarian cysts in women after menopause (once your period has stopped) are more likely to be cancerous than those in younger women. Things that may make you more likely to get ovarian cysts include:  Some women can have unusual complications with ovarian cysts. Your doctor might pick these up during apelvic exam, so it’s important to get regular checkups.  Sometimes, your doctor finds cysts during a pelvic exam. They’ll ask questions about your pain and other symptoms. A cyst can be fluid-filled, solid, or mixed. To diagnose what kind you have, your doctor may recommend one or more of the following tests:  Most cysts go away on their own. Your doctor may suggest watching and waiting for changes. Your doctor can give you medicine for pain. They might also prescribebirth control pills. The hormones in the pills won’t make the cysts go away, but they can help prevent new ones. Some ovarian cysts need surgery. That includes those that are large, don’t go away, or cause symptoms. You could also need surgery if you’re near menopause, because cysts are more likely to be cancerous. Depending on your case, the surgeon may take just the cyst or the entire ovary. There are different types of surgery:  SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians: “Ovarian Cyst.” Mayo Clinic: Diseases and Conditions, Ovarian cysts, “Definition,” “Ovarian Cysts.” American Family Physician: “Ovarian Cysts and Ovarian Cancer.” Office on Women’s Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: “Ovarian cysts.” Mount Sinai Hospital: “Ovarian cysts.” Lourdes Health System: “Ovarian Cysts.” The Center for Innovative Gyn Care: “Ovarian Cysts.” American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology: “Ovarian Cysts.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “What Risks Are Associated with a Ruptured Ovarian Cyst?” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.