An oophorectomy is surgery to remove yourovaries. You might also hear it called ovary removal surgery. There are many reasons your doctor may recommend surgery to remove your ovaries. They include: There are several types of oophorectomies. The one you’ll get depends on the medical condition you’re being treated for: Usually, you’ll getgeneral anesthesiafor surgery and won’t be awake. But in some cases, you may have local anesthesia instead. That means the doctor only numbs the area they’re working on. There are a few ways the surgery can be done. Your doctor will suggest the method based on your particular situation: If your doctor performs an open procedure to remove your ovaries, you can expect to stay in the hospital several days. If you have a laparoscopic or robot-assisted operation, you may stay in the hospital for a day or be released the same day. The doctor will give you instructions about your return to an active lifestyle. Things you can do to take care of yourself at home include: How quickly you can return to normal activities depends on your overall health before surgery, the reason for your surgery, and the way your surgery was done. Most women get back to an active life within 6 weeks of surgery. Women who had laparoscopic surgery or robot-assisted surgery tend to have quicker recoveries -- about 2 weeks. While you recover, look out for signs that you may need to see the doctor. Some things to watch out for include:  Although getting an oophorectomy is generally safe, as with any surgery, there are a few risks. They include: The doctor will discuss these risks with you before your surgery. If they advise you to have this surgery, it means they think the benefits outweigh the risks for you. This can causemenopause symptomslike: Your doctor may recommend low-dosehormone therapy, or other medications and lifestyle changes, to help you with the symptoms. Younger women may have concerns about whether they canget pregnant. It will depend on your situation. If the doctor removes only one ovary, the remaining ovary will probably still produceestrogen. That means you’ll still have amenstrual cycleand be able to get pregnant. If they remove both ovaries, you may need a treatment like in vitro fertilization to get pregnant. Sometimes, eggs can be removed from your ovaries before surgery and frozen for future use. Talk to your doctor about your options. SOURCES: Women’s Health. Hall, J.American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology, February 2006. Mayo Clinic: “Tests and Procedures, Oophorectomy,” “Prophylactic Oophorectomy: Preventing Cancer by Surgically Removing Your Ovaries,” “Oophorectomy (Ovary Removal Surgery).” University of Michigan. Facing Our Risk of Cancer Empowered (FORCE): “Surgical Removal of Ovaries and Tubes.” New York University School of Medicine. Cleveland Clinic: “Oophorectomy,” “Oophorectomy: Procedure Details,” “Oophorectomy: Recovery and Outlook.” American Cancer Society: “Surgery for Ovarian Cancer.” Breastcancer.org: “What Happens After Prophylactic Ovary Removal.” National Cancer Institute: “Premature Death.” UpToDate: “Patient education: Vaginal hysterectomy (Beyond the Basics).” Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center: “Fertility Preservation: Options for Women Who Are Starting Cancer Treatment.” What are the symptoms? Get to know the symptoms. HPV is the top cause. Find out more. See it in pictures, plus read the facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.