In 1940, the lifetime risk of a woman developingbreast cancerwas 5%, or one in 20.  The risk today is 12% -- or one in 8. In many cases, it's not known why a woman getsbreast cancer. A risk factor is anything that increases a person's chance of getting a disease. Different cancers have different risk factors. However, having acancerrisk factor, or even several of them, does not necessarily mean that a person will getcancer. Some women with one or more breast cancer risk factors never developbreastcancer, while about half of women with breast cancer have no apparent risk factors. Significantly higher risk Moderately higher risk  Slightly higher risk Previous abnormal breast biopsy.Women with earlierbiopsiesshowing any of the following have a slight increased risk: fibroadenomas with complex features, hyperplasia without atypia, sclerosing adenosis, and solitary papilloma. Having dense breasts.Your breasts have more fibrous than fatty tissue. Age atchildbirth.Having your first child after age 35 or never having children puts you at higher risk. Early menstruation.Longer lifetime exposure to endogenous (your own)estrogenincreases your risk, such as starting to menstruate before age 12, startingmenopauseafter age 55, and never having had apregnancy. Weight.Beingoverweight(especially in the waist), with excess caloric and fat intake, increases your risk, especially after menopause. Excessiveradiation.This is especially true for women who were exposed to a large amount of radiation before age 30 -- usually as treatment for cancers such aslymphoma. Other cancer in the family.If a family member hadovarian cancerunder age 50, your risk is increased. Heritage.Female descendants of Eastern and Central European Jews (Ashkenazi) are at increased risk. Alcohol.Use of alcohol is linked to increased risk of developing breast cancer. Compared with nondrinkers, women who consume onealcoholicdrink a day have a very smallincrease in risk, and those who have 2 to 5 drinks daily have about 1.5 times the risk of women who do not drink. Race.Caucasian womenare at a slightly higher risk of developing breast cancer than are African-American, Asian, Hispanic, and Native American women. The exception to this is African-American women, who are more likely than Caucasians to have breast cancer under age 40. Low risk Factors not related to breast cancer: Scientists are still investigating whether smoking, high-fat diets, lack of exercise, and environmental pollution increase breast cancer risk. Some studies have suggested that women who are using birth control pills have a very slight increased risk of developing breast cancer. That risk disappears after stopping them for 10 years or more. Still other studies show no connection. More research is under way to confirm these findings. Women whobreastfeedhave a reduced risk of breast cancer.  SOURCES:The American Cancer Society.National Cancer Institute. Medscape. Things your doctor considers when making a recommendation. What to know about today's surgical procedures. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.