Paget's diseaseof thebreastis a rare type ofcancerthat forms in or around your nipple. It’s involved in 1% to 4% of all breast cancers. It may be linked with an underlyingbreast cancer, eitherductal carcinoma in situorinvasive breast cancer. You might also hear it called Paget’s disease of the nipple or mammary Paget disease. Things that can make you more likely to get Paget’s disease of the breast include: Early symptoms include redness, light scaling, and flaking of theskinon your nipple. You might have only mild irritation, not enough to send you to the doctor. Your skin could get better on its own. This doesn’t mean the disease has gone away. Further symptoms can be a sign of serious damage to your skin. You might notice: In most cases, the disease starts in the nipple and then spreads to theareola(the circular area of darker skin that surrounds it) or other areas of your breast. Sometimes, it affects only the areola, where it can look likeeczema, an itchy redrash. Rarely, this condition can affect both breasts. Doctors aren’t sure what causes it. Paget’s is rare, but most people who get it have tumors in the same breast. One theory is that cancer cells from the tumor travel through milk ducts and into your nipple and areola. Your doctor will do a test called abiopsy. They’ll take a small sample of tissue from your nipple and send it to a lab, where a technician will check for Paget's cells. Your doctor will take the sample in one of a few ways: Because most people with this condition also have underlying breast cancer, your diagnosis will probably include: The treatment depends on the underlying breast cancer. You might have one or more these: Cancer treatment can have side effects that last a long time or that start weeks, months, or years after you finish treatment. These include: There’s no definite way to prevent cancer, but some lifestyle changes can help make it less likely. If you have one or more breast cancer risk factors, talk to your doctor about further steps, including: The outlook depends on: About 83% of women in the U.S. diagnosed with this condition from 1988 to 2001 lived at least 5 more years. By comparison, about 87% of women diagnosed with any kind of breast cancer in that period lived at least 5 more years. For women with both Paget's disease of the breast and invasive cancer in the same breast, the 5-year relative survival rate went down with each stage of the cancer: SOURCES: Kaelin CM. Paget’s Disease. In: Harris JR, Lippman ME, Morrow M, Osborne CK, editors. Diseases of the Breast. 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2004. DeVita,VT Jr., Hellman S, Rosenberg SA, editors. Cancer: Principles and Practice of Oncology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2004. Beers MH, Berkow R, editors. The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy. 17th ed. Whitehouse Station, NJ: Merck & Company, Inc., 1999. American Cancer Society (2005). Cancer Facts and Figures 2005. Atlanta, GA: American Cancer Society. Retrieved April 20, 2005, from https://www.cancer.org/downloads/STT/CAFF2005f4PWSecured.pdf. Marcus E. The management of Paget’s disease of the breast. Current Treatment Options in Oncology 2004; 5:153-160. National Cancer Institute: “Paget Disease of the Breast.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Paget’s Disease of the Breast.” Cedars-Sinai: “Paget’s Disease of the Breast.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Adjuvant Hormonal Therapy,” “Side Effects From Breast Cancer Treatment.” American Cancer Society: “Can I Lower My Risk of Breast Cancer?” Things your doctor considers when making a recommendation. What to know about today's surgical procedures. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.