The nerves of the brain and the spinal cord are protected by three surrounding membranes: the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater.Arachnoiditisis a pain disorder that develops when the arachnoid becomes inflamed. It is characterized by severe stinging, burning pain, and neurological problems. Symptoms of arachnoiditis can vary, but the most common is pain in the lower back or legs that is often described as burning or stinging pain. Others include: As the disease progresses, symptoms may become more severe or even permanent. Many people with arachnoiditis are unable to work and suffer significant disability because they are in constant pain. Inflammation of the arachnoid can be triggered by a number of different irritants, including: Diagnosing arachnoiditis can be difficult, but tests such as the CAT scan (computerized axial tomography) or MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) have helped with diagnosis. A test called an electromyogram (EMG) can assess the severity of the ongoing damage to affected nerve roots by using electrical impulses to check nerve function. Note: Myelograms with the radiographic contrast currently in use, combined with CAT scanning, are not considered to be responsible for causing arachnoiditis or causing it to worsen. There is no cure for arachnoiditis. Treatment options for arachnoiditis are similar to those for otherchronic painconditions. Most treatments focus on relieving pain and improving symptoms that impair daily activities. Often, health care professionals recommend a program of pain management, physiotherapy, exercise, andpsychotherapy. Surgery for arachnoiditis is controversial, because outcomes can be poor and provide only short-term relief.Clinical trialsof steroid injections and electrical stimulation are needed to determine whether those treatments are effective.  SOURCE: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.