The majority of people withcancerwill experiencepainat some time or another. The pain can result from thecanceritself, or from thecancer's treatment. In addition, some people who have been cured of their cancer can continue to suffer from pain. Cancer pain, or the discomfort that stems from cancer and its treatment, can be controlled most of the time. There are many different medicines and methods available to control cancer pain. People who have cancer and are feeling pain need to inform their doctor immediately. The earlierpain treatmentis started, the more effective it may be. There are many causes of cancer pain, but often cancer pain occurs when a tumor presses on nerves or body organs or when cancer cells invade bones or body organs. Cancer treatments such aschemotherapy,radiation, or surgery also maycause pain. The symptoms of cancer pain vary from person to person. The amount of pain may depend on the type of cancer, the stage or extent of the disease, and the person's pain threshold (tolerance for pain). Pain can range from mild and occasional to severe and constant. Mild to Moderate Pain Pain relievers:Acetaminophen(Anacin,Mapap,Panadol,Tylenol) and a group of pain relievers called nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) such asaspirinandibuprofen(Advil,Motrin) can treat mild to moderate pain. Many of these are over-the-counter drugs that do not require a prescription, but some do require a prescription. Patients should check with a doctor before using these medicines, especially if they are getting chemotherapy. NSAIDs can interfere withbloodclotting, cause gastrointestinal and kidney problems, and may lead to an increased risk of heart attack or stroke. Moderate to Severe Pain Narcotic pain relievers:These drugs includecodeine,morphine(Kadian,MS Contin),hydrocodone(Hysingla,Lortab,Norco,Vicodin,Zohydro ER),hydromorphone(Dilaudid,Exalgo),fentanyl(Duragesic),oxycodone(OxyContin), andtramadol. Narcotic pain relievers require a prescription and may be used along with mild pain relievers for moderate to severe pain. Tingling and Burning Pain Although cancer pain is usually treated with medicine, surgery to remove a tumor or radiation therapy to shrink a tumor can be used along with medicine to provide additional pain relief. In most cases, doctors treat cancer pain with pain-relief medicines called analgesics or with non-drug treatments such asphysical therapyand rehabilitation, imagery,biofeedbackand relaxation techniques. Other treatment options for cancer patients may include nerve blocks, which involve the injection of pain medicine into or around a nerve or the spine.  SOURCES: National Institutes of Health. American Cancer Society. What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.