There can be many causes of back pain including accidents, strains, and injuries. Two types of back injury are spondylolisthesis and cervical radiculopathy. Both have their own set of symptoms, causes, and treatments. The spine, or backbone, is made up of a column of 33 bones and tissue extending from the skull to the pelvis. These bones, or vertebrae, enclose and protect a cylinder of nerve tissues known as the spinal cord. Between each one of the vertebrae is an intervertebral disk, or band of cartilage serving as a shock absorber between the vertebrae. The types of vertebrae are: Thecauses of back paincan be complex. Some causes of back pain include accidents, muscle strains, and sports injuries. In addition to performing a complete history andphysical examfor yourback pain, your doctor may suggest one of the following diagnostic studies: A number of other imaging and electrical studies may also be used to identify back problems, and some injections are used for diagnostic purposes as well as for pain relief. Two main types of back injury include: There are many causes for Spondylolisthesis. A vertebra might be defective from the time a person is born, or a vertebra may be broken by trauma or a stress fracture. In addition, vertebrae can be broken down by infection or disease. Symptoms of Spondylolisthesis may include: Spondylolisthesis is treated with the strengthening of supportive abdominal and back muscles throughphysical therapy.Acetaminophenor nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medicines, such asketoprofen(Frotek),ibuprofen(Motrin,Advil), andnaproxen(Aleve,Naprosyn) may help with pain.Epiduralsteroid injections may also be effective. For patients who continue to have severe pain and disability despite these treatments, there are options such as decompressive laminectomy, a procedure in which the spinal canal is widened (to provide more room for nerves and a spinal fusion is performed to stabilize the spinal cord), with or without surgical fusion (arthrodesis) of the vertebra, or the use of an implanted device to stabilize the vertebrae in the lower back while permitting more normal movement. In cervical radiculopathy, damage can occur as a result of pressure from material from a ruptured disc, degenerative changes in bones, arthritis, or other injuries that put pressure on the nerve roots. In older people, normal degenerative changes in the discs can cause pressure on nerve roots. In younger people, cervical radiculopathy tends to be the result of a ruptured disc. This disc material then compresses the nerve root, causing pain. The main symptom of cervical radiculopathy is pain that spreads into the arm, neck, chest, and/or shoulders. A person with radiculopathy may experience muscle weakness and/or numbness or tingling in fingers or hands. Other symptoms may include lack of coordination, especially in the hands. Cervical radiculopathy may be treated with a combination of painmedicationssuch as acetaminophen (Tylenol), or nonsteroidal pain medication such as ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin), ketoprofen (Frotek), naproxen (Aleve, Naprosyn), and physical therapy. Steroids may be prescribed either orally or injected epidurally (into the epidural space that surrounds the spinal cord).  Physical therapy might include gentle cervical traction and mobilization, exercises, and other modalities to reduce pain.  If significant compression on the nerve exists to the extent that motor weakness results, surgery may be necessary to relieve the pressure.   SOURCES:WebMD Health News: “FDA Approves Cymbalta for Chronic Musculoskeletal Pain.” Davis R.Journal of Neurosurgery: Spine. August 2013. Is a firm mattress best for back pain? Maybe not. Learn about surgery options, possible risks, and recovery. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.