Parkinson’s plus syndromes, also called “atypical Parkinson’s,” are illnesses that attack yourbrainand nerve cells. As the name suggests, they’re linked to Parkinson’s disease and cause a lot of the same symptoms, but they can bring on other problems as well. Yourbrainmakes a chemical called dopamine that helps control your movement. “Parkinsonism” is the word doctors use to describe several conditions that can happen if you don’t make enough of it. Parkinson’s disease is by far the most common of these, but about 15% of people who have a problem making dopamine will have one of the Parkinson’s plus syndromes. Parkinson’s plus syndromes are more serious and harder to treat than “classic” Parkinson’s disease. The four main types are: Progressive Supranuclear Palsy(PSP) This is the most common Parkinson’s plus syndrome. It causes some of the same issues with movement and your muscles as Parkinson’s disease, like stiffness and problems with walking or balance, but it doesn’t usually make your limbs shake. It also can make it harder to move youreyes-- it starts in the part of yourbrainthat controls youreyemuscles. Looking down can be especially hard. It can cause mood changes, affect your ability to think of words, and make it hard to swallow as well. Dementia With Lewy Bodies This is the second most common form ofdementiaafter Alzheimer’s disease. Lewy bodies are clumps of protein that build up in your nerve cells. When that happens, it affects your ability to think clearly, speak, and remember things. It can make you confused and causehallucinations(when you see things that aren’t there). The symptoms get worse over time. Multiple System Atrophy This affects what’s known as your autonomic nervous system, which controls things like yourblood pressureanddigestive system. Symptoms can include things likefainting, losing control of yourbladder, andconstipation. It also causes more typical Parkinson’s symptoms, like shaking, stiffness, and problems with balance or speech. Corticobasal Degeneration This is the rarest of the four main types. It killsbraincells in the cerebral cortex -- the wrinkly gray matter on the outside of your brain -- and causes the cortex to shrink. It also attacks what’s called the basal ganglia, a part of your brain that controls movement. Its symptoms are like the ones caused by Parkinson’s disease, including the loss of muscle control, sometimes starting on only one side of your body. But it also can hurt your ability to think, see, and speak clearly. As the disease gets worse, it gets harder to walk and swallow. Parkinson’s plus syndromes can look a lot like other conditions that affect your nervous system, so it can sometimes take a while to find out for sure what’s going on. If your doctor thinks you might have Parkinson’s or a Parkinson’s plus syndrome, they’ll recommend that you see aneurologist, a doctor who specializes in problems with the nervous system. Your neurologist will examine you and see how you move and follow directions. They then might suggestbloodtests and a brain scan to rule out other conditions. If those don’t show a reason for your symptoms, they may ask you to try amedicationcalledcarbidopa-levodopa. Your brain can turn that into dopamine. If your symptoms get better, that may be enough for your doctor to diagnose Parkinson’s disease. If it doesn’t help much or at all, or it helps for a while then stops working, that can be a sign of a Parkinson’s plus syndrome. Other things that can point to a Parkinson’s plus syndrome rather than the classic form include: Doctors don’t know exactly what causes any of the Parkinson’s plus syndromes, and there’s no cure for them. Treating them usually is about managing the symptoms. That can include the following: SOURCES: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. American Parkinson Disease Association: “Atypical Parkinsonism & Parkinson plus syndromes.” National Parkinson Foundation: “What are the Different Types of Atypical Parkinsonism Syndromes?” Parkinson’s Disease Foundation: “Atypical Parkinsonism,” “Statistics on Parkinson’s.” Baylor College of Medicine: “Atypical Parkinsonism.” Deutsches Ärzteblatt International:“The Differential Diagnosis and Treatment of Atypical Parkinsonism.” Lewy Body Dementia Association: “Prognosis and Disclosing the Diagnosis.” CurePSP.org: “Progressive Supranuclear Palsy.” Causes, symptoms, and treatments. How does the disease progress? 8 common questions and answers. What are the advantages of DBS? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.