Apeak flow meteris an inexpensive, portable, handheld device for those with asthma that is used to measure how well air moves out of yourlungs. Measuring your peak flow using this meter is an important part of managing yourasthma symptomsand preventing anasthma attack. The peak flow meter works by measuring how fast air comes out of the lungs when you exhale forcefully after inhaling fully. This measure is called a "peak expiratory flow," or "PEF." Keeping track of your PEF, is one way you can know if yoursymptoms of asthmaare in control or worsening. Readings from a peak flow meter can help you or your child recognize early changes that may be signs of worseningasthma. During an asthma attack, the smooth muscles that surround the airways tighten and cause the airways to narrow. The peak flow meter alerts you to the tightening of the airways often hours or even days before you have any asthma symptoms. By using your PEF with yourasthma action plan, you will know when to take your rescue (quick acting)asthma inhaleror other asthma medicine. By following the steps in your asthma action plan, you may be able to stop the narrowing of the airways quickly and avoid a severeasthma emergency. The peak flow meter can also be used to help you: It is important to know that your peak flow meter only measures the amount of airflow out of the large airways of the lungs. Changes in airflow caused by the small airways (which also occur with asthma) will not be detected by a peak flow meter. Early warning signs, however, may be present. Therefore, it is important for you to also be aware of your symptoms and early warning signs to best manage your asthma. Peak flow meters are very helpful if you or your child have moderate to severe asthma and require daily asthma medications. Even most children ages 6 and up should be able to use a peak flow meter with good results. People with moderate-to-severe asthma should have a peak flow meter at home. A peak flow meter is simple to use for tracking your asthma. Here's what you do: To ensure the results of your peak flow meter are comparable, be sure to use your meter the same way each time you take a reading. Peak flow values are best if they are checked at the same time each day, preferably once in the morning and again at night. Ask your doctor how often you should check your peak flow.  The "personal best" peak expiratory flow (PEF) is the highest peak flow number you or your child can achieve over a two to three week period when asthma is under good control. Good control means you feel good and do not have any asthma symptoms. Your personal best PEF is important because it is the number to which all of your other peak flow readings will be compared. Your asthma action plan, developed along with yourasthma doctor, is based on this number. To find your personal best peak flow number, take peak flow readings: You should always use the same meter. Once you have determined your or your child's personal best PEF, work with your asthma care provider to determine at what point you should start taking quick-relief drugs to relieve an asthma attack or seek emergency medical attention. These are called your asthma peak flow zones. All of this information should be recorded in your personal asthma action plan. Then, continue to take peak flow readings each morning. Daily readings will help you: If your PEF drops below 80% of your personal best, follow your asthma action plan and check PEF more frequently that day or as directed by your doctor. Seek immediate help before your asthma symptoms worsen.  SOURCES: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: "Peak Flow Meter: Tips to Remember." American Lung Association: "Measuring Your Peak Flow Rate." MedlinePlus: "How to use your peak flow meter." Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America: "Peak Flow Meters." Potential long-term health effects of uncontrolled asthma. See when you should call 911 or go to the ER. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.