You have apeptic ulcerif you get open sores in the lining of yourstomachor the upper part of the small intestine. That happens when your stomach acids etch away your digestive tract’s protective layer ofmucus. You may have no symptoms, or you may feel discomfort or burning pain. Peptic ulcers can lead to internal bleeding, which sometimes can mean you’ll needbloodtransfusions in the hospital. You can have two types of peptic ulcer disease: You can have ulcers at any age, but your chances go up as you get older. Ulcers form when digestive juices damage the walls of thestomachor small intestine. If the mucus layer gets too thin or your stomach makes too much acid, your gut will feel it. The two major causes are: You’ll most likely feel a burning pain or discomfort between your belly button and breastbone. You might especially notice it on an empty stomach -- such as between meals or at night. Thepainmay stop for a little while if you eat or take an antacid, but then return. The pain can last for a few minutes or a few hours, and may come and go for many days or weeks. Other symptoms may include: Small ulcers may not cause any symptoms. But if you notice any of these signs, talk to your doctor. Your doctor will ask about your symptoms, whether you take NSAIDs and other drugs, and medical history. They’ll also check you forbloatingin the belly and pain. That may be enough to make a diagnosis. The only way your doctor can tell for sure if you have an ulcer is to look. They may use a series of X-rays or a test called anendoscopy. This test allows them to pass a thin, bendy tube down your throat and into your stomach and small intestine. The tube has a camera at the end so they can check the lining for ulcers. They may also take a small piece of the lining to test forH. pylori.Blood, breath, and stool sample tests also can screen for the bacteria. Some peptic ulcers heal on their own. But if you don’t treat them, the ulcers tend to come back. They can erode the blood vessel wall in your stomach or small intestine. The ulcers also can eat a hole through the lining and get infected. Or they can cause swelling, which may block food from moving from your stomach into your small intestine. IfH. pyloriis the culprit, your doctor may prescribe a mix ofantibioticsto kill it. Ifaspirinand other NSAIDs are behind the ulcer, you may need to cut down on them, stop taking them altogether, or switch to another pain reliever. Your doctor may also give you antacids to fight stomach acid, or prescribe medicine to lessen the acid your body makes.Prescription drugscalled cytoprotective agents can help protect the lining of the stomach or small intestine so the ulcer can heal. Whilestressand spicy foods can make symptoms of a peptic ulcer worse, they don’t seem to make you more likely to have one. But a few other things can raise your chances. Be careful when you take pain relievers.Some people who havearthritisor other conditions that causechronic paintake nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for weeks or months at a time to ease pain and swelling. These medicines can affect themucusthat protects your stomach against acid and make you more likely to have peptic ulcers. These pain relievers include: You're more likely to get an ulcer while taking one of these if you: To lower your chances for peptic ulcers while you take NSAIDs: While you're on NSAIDs, you can take medicine to lower the amount of acid your stomach makes.Drugsthat can do that include: You can also take the drugmisoprostol(Cytotec) to boost the amount of protectivemucusyour stomach makes. But that can cause side effects likediarrheaand stomach cramps. Don’t smoke, and limit alcohol.These two habits make you more likely to get peptic ulcers. Both thin the mucus lining that protects your stomach from acid, leading to more acid. Ask your doctor to recommend a program to help youquit smoking. And talk with them about how muchalcoholis safe for you to drink. Manage stress.Stresscan make the symptoms of a peptic ulcer worse. Figure out what’s causing issues for you and see how you can deal with it better. For example, getting enoughsleepcan help with that. It also can boost yourimmune system. Consider probiotics.Millions of bacteria normally live in your gut. Some, likeH. pylori, cause disease. Others are good for you because they help crowd out harmful bacteria. These helpful bacteria are calledprobiotics. They’re still being studied, but researchers think they may help with pepticulcers. You can find them in foods like these: PreventH. pyloriinfection.About two-thirds of people around the world have this type of infection, but most don’t get ulcers because of it. Doctors don’t know how you can avoidH. pylori, but they think it spreads from person to person or through food orwater. You can do some things to make an infection less likely: SOURCES: UpToDate: “Patient education: Peptic ulcer disease (Beyond the Basics).” American College of Gastroenterology: “Peptic Ulcer Disease.” Medical University of South Carolina Digestive Disease Center: “Peptic Ulcers.” Mayo Clinic: “Peptic Ulcer.” CDC: “Helicobacter pylori.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Peptic Ulcers.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Peptic Ulcer Disease.” Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics: "Prebiotics and Probiotics: Creating a Healthier You." Harvard Medical School: "Peptic Ulcer." National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health: "Probiotics: In Depth." PubMed Health: "Gastritis: How can you prevent peptic ulcers caused by painkillers?" The Journal of Nutrition:"Helicobacter pylori and probiotics." The Medical Letter:"Primary Prevention of Ulcers in Patients Taking Aspirin or NSAIDs." Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.