Peripheral artery disease, sometimes calledperipheral arterial diseaseor PAD, is a condition in which yourarteriesare narrowed and can’t carry as muchbloodto the outer parts of your body, like your arms and legs. It’s a form of peripheralvascular disease. Cramps that start when you’re moving and go away with rest are one of the warning signs of PAD. You will usually feel it in your legs, but it can be in other parts of your body, too. You can get PAD in your arms, head, stomach, and kidneys. If you don’t get treatment, you could be more likely to have aheart attackorstroke. It can also lead to you needing to have a limb removed (amputation). The most common cause of PAD is a blockage in the arteries, the vessels that carry blood away from theheart. This condition is calledatherosclerosis. It happens when things in your bloodstream likefatandcholesterolform plaques that build up in your arteries. Plaques are made up mostly of fat and are waxy at first. They collect slowly, so you don’t even know they’re there. Over time, plaque buildup makes your arteries harder and narrower. It’s a lot like old plumbing in a house. When there’s gunk in the pipes, water drains slowly, and the pipes start to clog. With plaque in your arteries, your blood flow slows, and your body doesn’t get the oxygen it needs. Doctors don’t know exactly why plaque builds up in the first place. They think it’s a slow-growing disease that could have its start in childhood. What are some less common PAD causes? If you don’t have atherosclerosis, your doctor may start to look for: If you haveheart disease, you have a 1-in-3 chance of having PAD. Other things that raise your chance of having PAD include: Smoking is the single biggest PAD risk factor that is in your control. It raises your risk for PAD by 400% compared with nonsmokers. And in people who get PAD, smokers tend to get symptoms 10 years earlier than nonsmokers. In addition, smokers with PAD do less well after certain types of heart bypass surgery, are twice as likely to require limb amputation, and die more often of stroke or heart attack. Talk to your doctor about medications and therapies that can help you quit smoking. You may havemuscle painor cramping because there’s less blood flow to your legs. This type ofpainis called claudication. You usually feel it when you walk or climb stairs, but it stops when you rest. It can affect different muscle groups, including: What about symptoms in advanced PAD? Some people have a sense of burning or numbness. If you have an advanced form of PAD, your toes or feet might hurt even while you’re resting. Other signs and symptoms might include: If you have PAD in your arms, you’ll have similar symptoms to the ones in your legs. You may feel pain, cramps, or heaviness during activities, but it goes away when you rest. You may notice that your hands are cold or numb and that your fingers look blue or pale. And you may also have sores on your arms and hands that don’t seem to heal. You can also have severe blockages with no pain at all. This usually is because your body grows blood vessels around the blockages. When should you talk to your doctor? If you have leg pain when you walk or any other PAD symptoms, talk to your doctor about it. Smoking is the main cause of this condition, but age and diabetes also play a role. Even if you don’t have symptoms, ask your doctor about PAD if you’re 70 or older. You should also ask about it if you’re 50 or older and you have diabetes or have ever been a smoker. If you have diabetes before age 50, talk to your doctor about PAD if any of the following are also true: Your doctor will start with aphysical examto look for signs of PAD. They might check blood flow in your legs and feet and listen for a whooshing sound in your leg arteries. You might get other tests, including: If you have PAD, your doctor can tell you about the best treatment for you. It could mean changes to your lifestyle, new medicine, or for more advanced cases, surgery. There are some simple things your doctor might recommend to help manage your symptoms and keep your PAD from getting worse. These include: You also might need medical treatments including: PAD can be a warning sign because if you have plaque in your legs, you probably have it in other places, too. You may have build-up in the arteries of your heart. This is called coronary artery disease. You may also have it in the ones that go to your kidneys. This is known as renal artery disease. This can also happen in the carotid arteries, which carry blood to the brain, leading to a stroke. If you have PAD and diabetes, you have a higher chance of getting what’s called critical limb ischemia. This starts with a sore or infection, usually in your foot or leg. But it doesn’t heal or go away. In some cases, you may need to have your foot or part of your leg removed. Healthy lifestyle choices are the first step to helping to prevent PAD. The single biggest effect you can have is to stop smoking. Or don’t start. That means: Remember that it’s often hard to detect symptoms of PAD, especially in the initial stages. Regular checkups can help with early diagnosis and treatment that can keep the worst symptoms and complications of PAD at bay. SOURCES: American Heart Association website: "Few Americans aware of dangerous peripheral artery disease," "Peripheral Artery Disease." Hirsch, A.Journal of the American Medical Association,2001; vol 286: pp1317-1324. McDermott, M. Journal of the American Medical Association,2001; vol 286: pp 1599-1606. McGee, S.Archives of Internal Medicine,1998; vol 158: pp 1357-1364. Selvin, E.Circulation,2004; vol 110: pp 738-743. Jude, E.Diabetes Care,2001; vol 24: pp 1433-1437. Sloan, H.Nursing99, 1999; vol 29: pp 58-59. Norgren, L.Journal of Vascular Surgery,2007; vol 45: pp S5-S67. Thompson, P.American Journal of Cardiology,2002; vol 90: pp 1314-1319. Leng, G.Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,2000; CD000990. McDermott, M.Journal of the American Medical Association,2004; vol 292: pp 453-461. O'Hare, A.Circulation,2006; vol 113: pp. 388-393. Mark Silverman, MD, emeritus professor of medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta. Society for Vascular Surgery: "Angiogram," “Peripheral Arterial Disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Peripheral artery disease (PAD),” “Symptoms and Causes Arteriosclerosis/Atherosclerosis.” Texas Heart Institute: “Peripheral Vascular Disease.” National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Peripheral Artery Disease,” “Explore Peripheral Artery Disease,” “What Is a Coronary Calcium Scan?” “What Is Carotid Artery Disease?” “What is Atherosclerosis?” Cleveland Clinic: “Peripheral Artery Disease (PAD).” Harvard Health Publications: “Peripheral Artery Disease.” CDC: “Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD) Fact Sheet.” National Institutes of Health: “Facts about Peripheral Arterial Disease,” “What Is Peripheral Artery Disease?” “What Causes Atherosclerosis?” “Who Is at Risk for Atherosclerosis?” “High Blood Cholesterol: What You Need To Know.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Peripheral Vascular Disease.” NIH Senior Health: “What is P.A.D.?” American Diabetes Association: “Peripheral Arterial Disease.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion: “Manage Stress.” Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.