A PET scan (also known as positron emission tomography and PET/CT) is a type of imaging study that can show doctors what’s happening in your body and how it’s working. It’s different from an X-ray, CT, orMRI. They all provide images, but aPET scanshows how your body’s working. It provides information aboutbloodflow and how your body’s using oxygen and sugar. That can give important clues about how a disease is unfolding. When you get a PET scan, your doctor first gives you a radioactive substance called a radiotracer (or just “tracer”). The tracer gives offradiation, which the PET scan machine picks up on. The images you get show where in your body the tracer goes. If it builds up in certain areas, that could be a sign of disease. A PET scan can help doctors test for disease, prepare for surgery, and see how well treatments are working. You might get one for several reasons, but they’re most often used withcancer,heart disease, andbrainconditions. Your doctor may use a PET scan to: Withheart disease, your doctor might use a PET scan to: Your doctor may also use it to check forbrainconditions, such as:  Doctors use different types of imaging for different reasons. Often, you start with an X-ray because it’s a quick way to get basic information. But if you need finer detail, you might then get aCT scanor MRI. Many doctors use MRI/PET and CT/PET hybrid scanners, which combines the two tools into a single scan. This allows doctors to do either a CT or MRI scan in combination with a PET scan all at once. A PET scan can show what’s actually happening in your cells. One reason that’s important is because early on, some diseases don’t cause changes you can see with an MRI or CT scan. But they do cause changes in how your cells are working. That means a PET scan might help your doctor find a disease that other types of imaging can’t. First, you’ll need to tell your doctor about any of the following: If you’re a woman, tell your doctor if you’re: Your doctor will give you specific directions to prepare for your scan. Be sure to follow them closely. Often you’ll need to: It depends where and why you get the scan, but typically, you: The PET scan machine is a big, open circle -- like a standing donut -- with a table that moves in and out of it. If you have a fear of tight, closed spaces, you may get a drug to help keep you calm. You’ll hear the machine buzz and click as it takes images. The scan itself is painless. For some people, staying still for so long is the hardest part and may cause some aches or discomfort. After the scan, drink plenty of fluids to help flush the tracer out of your body. Your doctor may suggest you avoid close contact with pregnant women, kids, or babies for a few hours since you’ll be radioactive for a short time. Within a few hours or days after the PET scan, the radioactive material within the tracer will decay and will no longer be radioactive. You’ll pass it out of your body in urine and stool. A PET scan is painless and has few risks and side effects. But you may have discomfort or problems, such as:  A PET scan shows bright areas where there’s heavy activity in your cells, which may be a sign of disease. To get a more complete picture of what’s going on, your doctor may compare your PET scan with results from other imaging you’ve had. Test results are very accurate, but a combined PET/CT tends to be more accurate than the results of either test on its own. You can get results within 24 hours, but it depends on where you have the scan done. SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “X-rays, CT scans, and MRIs.” RadiologyInfo.org: “Positron Emission Tomography -- Computer Tomography (PET/CT).” The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, “Getting a PET Scan? What to Expect.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.