Peyronie's disease ispenisproblem caused by scar tissue, called plaque, that forms inside thepenis. It can result in a bent, rather than straight, erect penis. Most men withPeyronie's diseasecan still have sex. But for some, it can be painful and cause erectile dysfunction. Depending on the symptoms,  you may opt for observation, medical or surgical treatments. Doctors don’t know exactly why Peyronie's disease happens. Many researchers believe the fibrous plaque can start after trauma (hitting or bending) that causes bleeding inside the penis. You might not notice the injury or trauma. Other cases, which develop over time, may be linked to genes. In some men, injury and genes could both be involved. Somemedicationslist Peyronie's disease as a possible side effect. But there is no proof that these drugs cause the condition. Although it mostly happens in middle-aged men, younger and older men can get it. It becomes more common as a man gets older. But it’s not a normal part of aging. Symptoms may develop slowly or appear overnight. When the penis is soft, you can’t see a problem. But in severe cases, the hardened plaque hampers flexibility, causing pain and forcing the penis to bend or arc when erect. In most cases, the pain eases over time, but the bend in the penis can worsen. Some men with the condition develop scar tissue elsewhere in the body, such as on the hand or foot. Men with Dupuytren's contractures -- scarring in the hand that affects fingers -- seem to be more likely to get Peyronie's. Tell your doctor about anything, such as an injury, that happened before the symptoms started. You’ll get an exam in which your doctor will feel the hardened tissue caused by the disease during an exam. It’s not always necessary, but if the penis has to be erect for the exam, the doctor would inject a medicine to make that happen. There’s a chance you may need to get an X-ray orultrasoundof the penis. It’s rare, but in some cases where the doctor's exam does not confirm Peyronie's disease, or if the condition develops rapidly, your doctor may do abiopsy. That involves removing a little bit of tissue from the affected area for lab tests. Yes, but you might not need it. Since the condition improves without treatment in some men, doctors often suggest waiting 1 to 2 years or longer before they try to correct it. Mild cases of the condition rarely need treatment. Also, the pain that comes from Peyronie's disease happens only with an erection and is usually mild. If it’s not causing a problem with yoursexlife, treatment may not be necessary. If you need treatment, your doctor will consider surgery or medicine. First, your doctor will probably prescribe a pill, such aspentoxifyllineorpotassiumpara-aminobenzoate (Potaba). If those don’t work, you may get a shot ofverapamilor collagenase (Xiaflex) into the scar tissue of the penis. If nothing else works, your doctor may consider surgery, but usually only for men who can’t have sex because of their Peyronie’s disease. The two most common operations are: Unfortunately, these procedures aren’t a sure solution. With the first method, you could have some erection problems. The second method, which doctors call the Nesbit procedure, shortens the erect penis. In some cases, it may be an option to get a penileprosthesisimplanted. This treatment is only for men who have both Peyronie's disease and ED (erectile dysfunction). Most types of surgery help. But because of the possibility of complications that can’t be corrected, most doctors prefer to operate only on the small number of men with curvature so severe that it prevents sex. There have been mixed results on studies ofvitamin Eand with potassium aminobenzoate, which is related to the Bvitamins. They aren’t proven cures. Other ways to treat Peyronie's disease that are unproven include injecting chemicals directly into the plaque andradiation therapy. But because radiation therapy can only relieve pain associated with Peyronie's disease and pain often stops without treatment, it’s rarely done. In most men who have penile pain due to Peyronie's disease, the discomfort usually will fade on its own as the penile inflammation subsides. This process may take as long as 6 to 18 months. SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Urology Care Foundation: “How Is Peyronie’s Disease Treated?” UpToDate. 11 things every man should stop believing. What it means for your overall health. Your guide to sculpted shoulders, better biceps, and more. What you need to know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.