Thesymptoms of Parkinson's diseasemay cause you to move more slowly. You may also feel tightness, pain, and weakness, especially in the muscles and joints. Physical andoccupational therapymay help with these symptoms. Physical therapy cannot cure Parkinson's disease, because at this time, neurological damage cannot be reversed. But therapy can help you compensate for the changes brought about by the condition. These "compensatory treatments," as they're called, include learning about new movement techniques, strategies, and equipment. A physical therapist can teach you exercises to strengthen and loosen muscles. Many of these exercises can be performed at home. The goal of physical therapy is to improve your independence and quality of life by improving movement and function and relieving pain. Physical therapy can help with: Important note:Some physical therapists may apply diathermy (local heat application produced by high-frequency electrical current) to relieve muscle aches and pains. This could be dangerous to patients who havedeep brain stimulators. Many hospitals offer outpatient physical therapy services. However, you may need to get a doctor's order to be seen in physical therapy. If you feel you can benefit from physical therapy, do not hesitate to ask your doctor for a referral. Treatments in physical therapy often can be completed in one to three office visits. The first appointment includes an evaluation and recommendations for exercises. The following appointments check your progress and review and expand your home program. Most hospitals can provide additional sessions of outpatient therapy if needed. Recommendations.A physical therapist can make recommendations for physical therapy at home, at an outpatient facility, or at a nursing or rehabilitation facility. Work capacity evaluations.Many physical therapists can perform functional capacity evaluations to provide more information for disability claims based on physical performance. This functional capacity evaluation can be useful when the Social Security office denies disability to a person who is unable to work for an eight-hour day. Occupational therapy can help people withParkinson's diseasestay active in daily life. By improving your skills, showing you different ways to complete tasks, or introducing you to handy equipment, an occupational therapist can help you perform everyday activities with greater ease and satisfaction. An occupational therapist may also recommend making changes to your home or workplace to promote your independence. For Parkinson's disease, occupational therapy generally provides assessment, treatment, and recommendations in the following areas: Many hospitals offer outpatient occupational therapy services. However, you may need to get a doctor's order to be seen in occupational therapy. If you feel you can benefit from occupational therapy, do not hesitate to ask your doctor for a referral. Occupational therapy sessions vary for each person. The first appointment includes an evaluation and recommendations. The following appointments check your progress and review or expand your program.  SOURCES: National Parkinson Foundation: "Managing Advanced Parkinson's Disease." Parkinson's Disease Foundation: "Physical Therapy in PD." Parkinson's Disease Foundation: "Frequently Asked Questions: Occupational Therapy." Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center: "Physical Therapy and Occupational Therapy for Parkinson's Disease." National Parkinson Foundation: "Guidelines for Occupational Therapy in Parkinson's Disease."  Causes, symptoms, and treatments. How does the disease progress? 8 common questions and answers. What are the advantages of DBS? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.