Pick's diseaseis a kind ofdementiasimilar toAlzheimer'sbut far less common. It affects parts of thebrainthat control emotions, behavior, personality, and language. It's also a type of disorder known as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) or frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Yourbrainuses a transport system to help move around thenutrientsit needs. This system is made of proteins that like railroad tracks guiding trains guide nutrients where they need to go. The proteins that keep the tracks straight are called tau proteins. When you have Pick's disease, the tau proteins don't work the way they should. You may also have more of them in yourbrainthan other people. These abnormal clumps of tau proteins are called Pick bodies. Pick bodies "derail" your transport system. The track is no longer straight, and nutrients in the brain can't get where they need to go. This causesbrain damagethat can't be reversed. Around 50,000 to 60,000 people in the U.S. have Pick's disease. It's usually diagnosed between the ages of 40 and 75, but it can happen in people as young as 20. It affects more men than women. People of Scandinavian descent are at a slightly higher risk of getting it than others. Up to 25% of people with Pick's disease received a gene that causes it from a parent. Experts aren't sure why it happens in other cases. Pick bodies typically form in the frontal and temporal lobes of the brain. These sections control your behavior, personality, and speech. Symptoms usually show up in those areas. You may: Some people become hungry all the time, and some develop an unhealthy "sweet tooth" and eat much moresugarthan they should. Problems with language usually happen early in the disease. Pick bodies in the speech section of your brain can cause problems with: Occasionally, people with Pick's disease might also have: Pick's disease has many of the same causes and symptoms thatAlzheimer'sdoes. But there are key differences. Unlike people withAlzheimer's disease, people with Pick's disease: To find out if you have Pick's disease, your doctor will ask about your symptoms and go over your medical history. Then you'll have special tests that check your memory, behavior, language, and other mental functions. These are usually pencil and paper tests. You'll answer questions in writing and may be asked to draw certain objects. The doctor may also recommend abloodtest that looks at your DNA to see if you have the gene that causes Pick's disease. To get a better picture of what's happening in your brain, your doctor may order imaging tests, such as: You may also have a lumbar puncture. Your doctor will use a long needle to take a small amount of fluid from an area near yourspinefor screening. In rare cases, your doctor might want to take a small amount of your brain tissue to test. This is called abiopsy. There's no cure for Pick's disease, and medications can't slow it down. It can progress slowly, but usually, it steadily gets worse over time. Some people live as long as 10 years with the disease. Your doctor can recommend treatment to help you deal with many of your symptoms. They may suggest behavioraltherapyto help control any dangerous behavior andantidepressantsto help with agitation or aggression. SOURCES: Alzheimer's Association: "Brain Tour," "Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD)." The Association for Frontotemporal Degeneration: "Pick's Disease." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Frontotemporal Dementia." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Frontotemporal Degeneration." Medscape: "Pick Disease." When it’s more than just forgetfulness. These may harm your cognition. Common symptoms to look for. Can drinking red wine reverse the disease? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.