If you’ve ever wiped your nose and seenblood, you’ve had a nosebleed. They’re common: One out of every seven people in the United States will get a one at some point. They’re most common in kids between 2 and 10 years old and adults between 50 and 80 years old. Anosebleedcomes from the front of your nose (anterior) or the back of it (posterior). It can be hard to tell if you have a posterior or anterior nosebleed. Both can make blood flow toward the back of your throat if you’re lying on your back. But posterior nosebleeds can be much more serious. You’re more likely to need emergency help. Most are spontaneous, meaning they happen unexpectedly and don’t have a known cause. But if you get nosebleeds a lot, there may be a reason you can pinpoint: Nosebleeds can also be caused by bleeding disorders, but it’s rare. If your nosebleed doesn’t stop, or you have a lot of bleeding from your gums or when you get minor cuts, see a doctor. Bleeding disorders can be serious because platelets in your blood that help it clot are missing or aren’t working. Another rare cause of nosebleeds can be a tumor in the nose orsinuses. It may be noncancerous, also called benign, or cancerous. Only about 2,000 cases of cancerous tumors in the nose orsinusesare diagnosed in the U.S. each year. In some cases, nosebleeds can be caused by genes passed down in families. A rare condition calledhereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia(HHT) affects the blood vessels. The main symptom is repeated nosebleeds that seem to come out of nowhere and get worse over time. If you have HHT, you might wake up at night with your pillow soaked in blood, and you may develop red spots on your face or hands. If one or both of your parents has this condition and you’re having nosebleeds, ask your doctor about being tested for it. Treatments can help improve your symptoms. SOURCES: American Academy of Otolaryngology: “Nosebleeds.” KidsHealth.org: “Nosebleeds.” HealthyChildren.org: “Nosebleed.” Cleveland Clinic: “Nosebleed (Epistaxis),” “When Do Frequent Nose Bleeds Signal Rare, Dangerous Disorder?” Cedars-Sinai: "Nasal and Sinus Tumors." Mayo Clinic: “Nosebleeds.” Why do some people bruise more easily? 8 essentials for car or purse. 4 steps for adults. Learn when to call a doctor. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.