Rashesare abnormal changes inskincolor or texture. They usually result from skininflammation, which can have many causes. There are many types of rashes, including eczema,granuloma annulare,lichen planus, andpityriasis rosea. Eczema is a general term that describes several different conditions in which skin is inflamed, red, scaly, and itchy.Eczemais a common skin condition, andatopic dermatitis(also called atopic eczema) is one of the most commonforms of eczema. Eczema can affect adults or children. The condition isn’t contagious. View a slideshow toget an overview on eczema. Causes We don’t know for sure what causes atopic eczema, but the condition often affects people with afamily historyofallergies. If you have eczema, you may also havehay feverand/orasthma, or have family members with those conditions. Some things can trigger a flare-up of eczema or make eczema worse, but they don’t cause the condition. Eczema triggers includestress, skin irritants (including soaps,skin care products, or some fabrics), allergens, and climate/environment. Learn more about thelink between allergies and eczema. Symptoms The way eczema looks can vary from person to person. In adults, eczema most often affects the hands, elbows, and "bending" areas like the inside of the elbows and back of your knees. In young children, eczema often shows up inside the elbows, behind the knees, and on the face, back of the neck, and scalp. Signs and symptoms of atopic eczema include: Diagnosis To diagnose atopic eczema, the doctor will check your skin and ask about your symptoms. They might test an area of scaly or crusty skin to rule out other skin diseases or infections. Find out more on thesymptoms and diagnosis of eczema. Treatment You can treat eczema with moisturizers that are fragrance-free and contain ingredients such as ceramides,glycerin, andmineral oil.Medicationsinclude over-the-counter creams and ointments containing the steroidhydrocortisone(for example,Cortizone-10, Cort-Aid, Dermarest Eczema,NeosporinEczema). These products may help control the itching, swelling, and redness linked to eczema. Prescription-strengthcortisonecreams, as well as cortisone pills and shots, are also used for more severe cases. For people with mild to moderate eczema, topical immunomodulators (TIMs) can help. TIMS -- including brand name productsElidelandProtopic-- work by changing the body's immune response to allergens, preventing flare-ups. Crisaborole (Eucrisa) is an ointment for mild tomoderatepsoriasisin those 2 and older. Dupilumab (Dupixent) is an injectable monoclonal antibody used in patients with moderate to severe atopic dermatitis. It clears theitchquickly in most patients. Other drugs that might be used for people with eczema includeantibiotics(to treat infected skin) andantihistamines(to help control itching). Phototherapyis another treatment that helps some people with eczema. The ultraviolet light waves found in sunlight have been shown to help treat certain skin disorders, including eczema. Phototherapy uses ultraviolet light -- either ultraviolet A (UVA) or ultraviolet B (UVB) -- from special lamps to treat people with severe eczema. Risks linked to phototherapy include burning (usually resembling a mildsunburn),dry skin, itchy skin, freckling, and possible premature aging of the skin. Yourhealth careprofessionals will work with you to lessen any risks. Get more details abouttreatments for eczema. Prevention There’s no way to prevent atopic eczema, but you can do things to improve your symptoms: Read more onhow to prevent eczema flare-ups.  Granuloma annulare is a chronic skin condition that consists of a circular-shaped rash with reddish bumps (papules). Most often, the condition affects children and young adults. Granuloma annulare is slightly more common in girls and usually is seen in people who are otherwise healthy. Causes We don’t know what causes granuloma annulare. Symptoms People who have granuloma annulare usually notice one or more rings of small, firm bumps over the backs of their forearms, hands, orfeet. The rash may be mildly itchy. Diagnosis Your doctor can diagnose you. They might use a skinbiopsyto confirm you have granuloma annulare. Treatment Treatment of granuloma annulare usually isn’t necessary, except for cosmetic reasons. In some cases,steroidcreams or ointments can help the bumps disappear. Some doctors may decide to freeze the lesions with liquid nitrogen or to inject steroids directly into the rings of bumps. Ultravioletlight therapyor oral drugs can be used in serious cases. See a photo of what granuloma annulare looks like. Lichen planusis a common skin disorder that produces shiny, flat-topped bumps. They often have an angular shape and a reddish-purplish color. Lichen planus can show up anywhere on the skin but often affects the insides of your wrists andankles, your lower legs, your back, and your neck. Some people have lichen planus inside theirmouth, genital region, scalp, and nails. Thick collections of bumps may occur, especially on the shins. Lichen planus most often affects adults ages 30-70. It isn’t common in very young or elderly people. Causes Doctors think lichen planus is an autoimmune condition, meaning your body’simmune systemattacks its own tissues. But they don’t know what causes it. Sometimes lichen planus results from a triggering agent such ashepatitis Borhepatitis C. Doctors call that a lichenoid reaction. If you’re allergic to medications to treathigh blood pressure,heart disease, andarthritis, you could get a lichen planus-type rash. Lichen planus isn’t contagious. Symptoms Signs and symptoms of the condition include shiny, flat-topped bumps that are purple or a reddish-purplish color. It’s often itchy. When it shows up on your scalp, lichen planus can lead tohair loss. Lichen planus of the nails can cause brittle or split nails. Diagnosis A doctor can diagnose lichen planus by the way it looks or with the use of a skin biopsy. For this procedure, they’ll take a small bit of skin from the affected area and send it to a lab for testing. Treatment Lichen planus can’t be cured, but you can treat the symptoms with anti-itch products like antihistamines (for example,Benadryl, or diphenhydramine). If lichen planus affects only a small part of the body, you can apply medicated cream to the affected area. In more severe cases, doctors might prescribe steroid shots, prednisone, or other drugs that suppress your immune system. They might also give you retinoids or try light therapy. View a slideshow to see photos oflichen planus and other skin reactions. Pityriasis rosea is a common skin rash that usually is mild. The condition often begins with a large, scaly, pink patch of skin on your chest or back. Next you’ll notice one patch of pink skin quickly followed by more. Your skin will be itchy and red or inflamed. The number and sizes of spots can vary. Causes We don’t know what causes pityriasis rosea. But there is evidence that suggests pityriasis rosea may be caused by a virus because the rash resembles certain viral illnesses. The rash doesn’t seem to spread from person to person. Symptoms The primary symptom of pityriasis rosea is that large, scaly, pink area of skin followed by more itchy, inflamed, or reddened patches. Pityriasis rosea affects the back, neck, chest,abdomen, upper arms, and legs. The rash can differ from person to person. Diagnosis A doctor can usually diagnose pityriasis rosea by looking at it. They may dobloodtests, scrape your skin, or do a skin biopsy to rule out other skin conditions. Treatment If your case is mild, you may not need treatment. Even more serious cases sometimes go away on their own. Oral antihistamines (like diphenhydramine), over-the-counter medications you rub on your skin, and prescription steroids can help soothe the itch. Sores may heal faster with some exposure to sunlight or ultraviolet light. Don’t get too much sun, though. In most cases, pityriasis rosea goes away within 6-12 weeks. See a photo ofwhat pityriasis rosea looks like. Photo Credit: ©DermNet NZ / www.dermnetnz.org 2022 SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology. Australasian College of Dermatology. National Organization for Rare Disorders – Photo Caption DermNet NZ – Photo Caption Cleveland Clinic – Photo Caption Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.