Frecklesare extra patches of coloring (or pigment) under yourskin. Doctors call them ephelides. You have them because of the genes you were born with. Freckles often show up during childhood, and you may continue to get more until you're in your 20s. They're most common in people with fair skin or red hair, but anyone can have them. If you have dark skin, your freckles may show up as darker brown spots. Types of freckles There are two types of freckles: ephelides and solarlentigines. Although both are flat spots, they’re different in a few ways. Ephelides: Solar lentigines: The harmful rays of the sun can make your freckles darker and easier to see. This is more likely if you have light skin. Too much sun may also cause your skin to become: Natural freckles don't need treatment. They aren’t a sign of askin problem. As you get older, they may get lighter on their own or go away entirely, depending on what type of freckle they are. If you don't like how your freckles look, treatments can help fade them. These include: A dermatologist will need to decide which treatment is best for you. You should see a doctor if your freckles: You can avoid getting more freckles by protecting yourself from the sun. Some of the best ways are: You may confuse freckles for lentigines, which are also called age spots or liver spots. They can look tan, brown, or black and are common in people who are 50 or older. You can get them if you're younger, though. Sunspots are caused by too much pigment stuck together in one area of your skin. This can happen after many years of spending a lot of time in the sun. Tanning beds can cause sunspots, too. If you have sunspots, you could also see: Sunspots are harmless, but if you don't like how they look, prescription creams can lighten them. Sometimes you can have them removed. Have a doctor check out any dark spots on your skin. You might mistakemolesfor freckles, but they're something different. Also called "nevi," moles form when a bunch of your skin cells clump together. You can find moles anywhere on your body. For instance, you can have them on your scalp, between your toes, and under your nails. Almost everyone has at least a few moles. Even having dozens is normal. You're more likely to have moles if you have light skin. They often appear when you're a child. Moles may look: Most moles don't need treatment. If you don't like how one looks, your doctor should be able to remove it with a short in-office procedure. Never try to remove a mole yourself. It can cause a scar or infection. If you notice any changes to a mole, or if it gets itchy or starts to bleed, get it checked by a dermatologist. These can be earlysigns of skin cancer. The doctor might send a small tissue sample of the mole to a lab for testing. If the test findscancercells, they'll remove the entire mole.Skin canceris easiest to treat when you find it early. Photo credits: Irina Bogolapova/Dreamstime Richard Usatine, MD SOURCES: KidsHealth: "What Are Freckles?" American Academy of Dermatology Association: "Freckles and sunburn (ages 11-13)," "Variety of options available to treat pigmentation problems," "Moles," “Sunscreen FAQs.” Mayo Clinic: "Age Spots (Liver Spots)," "Mayo Clinic Q and A: All About Freckles." Journal of Cutaneous and Aesthetic Surgery: "A Split-face Comparative Study of 70% Trichloroacetic Acid and 80% Phenol Spot Peel in the Treatment of Freckles." Skin Cancer Foundation: "Melanoma at Its Most Curable." Pigment Cell & Melanoma Research: “Sun‐induced freckling: ephelides and solar lentigines.” Harvard Health Publishing: “Age Spots (Solar Lentigo, Liver Spots).” Mayo Clinic: “Age spots (liver spots).” Prevent Cancer Foundation: “Save Your Skin.” Cleveland Clinic: “Q & A: Freckles and Your Skin,” "Freckles (Ephelides and Solar Lentigines)." Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.