Autoimmune blistering disorders (also called autoimmune blistering diseases or autoimmune bullous disorders) are a group of rareskindiseases. They happen when yourimmune systemattacks your skin and mucous membranes -- the lining inside yourmouth, nose, and other parts of your body. This causesblistersto form. Researchers have found many types of this disorder. Although there's no cure for them, your doctor can give you treatments to help heal the blisters and prevent complications. Autoimmune blistering disorders are broken down into different types. These are some of the main ones: Pemphigusis a group of disorders that causeblistersto form on the skin and inside themouth, nose, throat, eyes, and genitals. They are soft and can break open easily. Pemphigoidis another group. It has three main types: IgA mediated bullous dermatosesare disorders in which the immune system makes a lot of immunoglobulin A (IgA), a type of antibody that fights bacteria, toxins, and viruses. It comes in two types: Epidermolysis bullosa acquisitamostly affects middle-aged and older adults. It makes the skin so fragile that blisters form from minor injuries. The places on your body where blisters form depends on which disorder you have. Some autoimmune blistering disorders cause blisters to grow on the skin. Other types cause them to form in the mucous membranes that line the mouth, nose, throat,eyes, and genitals. They can be painful or itchy. They can break open and leave a sore. When your immune system is working as it should, it attacks bacteria and other invaders before they can make you sick. In autoimmune blistering disorders, your system mistakes healthy cells in your skin and mucous membranes for unwanted intruders. Your immune system makes proteins called antibodies. These attack the substances that hold the outer (epidermis) and inner (dermis) layers of skin together. The damage causes the two layers of skin to separate. Fluid collects between the two and forms blisters. Doctors don't know what causes the immune system to misfire. Some people have genes that make them more likely to get one of these disorders. Then, something actually triggers it, such as: Some medicines can also cause autoimmune blistering disorders. These include: Usually, the blisters go away once you stop taking the medicine causing them. Blisters can cause long-term problems if they form in certain parts of the body or break open.  You'll see a dermatologist. They will look at your skin and see where the blisters have formed. You might get one or more of these tests: Sometimes it’s hard to tell the difference between autoimmune blistering disorders and other conditions, including:  Your doctor will decide on a treatment based on your symptoms. Medicines for these disorders lower the immune system response and prevent it from attacking your skin and mucous membranes. Treatments might includeprescriptionsfrom these classes of drugs: For more serious cases, your treatments might include: Blisters that pop open can get infected. These drugs help prevent an infection:  To prevent infections and help you stay more comfortable, take care of your blisters. Keep them clean the way your doctor recommends. Try not to pop them. This can leave scars. If a blister is in an uncomfortable place such as yourfoot, your doctor can release the fluid with a clean needle. Also: Each person with autoimmune blistering disorders is different. Some people have only mild blisters that go away on their own. Others have more severeskin problemsthat are harder to treat. Talk to your doctor about your situation. Try different treatments until you find one that works for you. SOURCES: Photo Credit: Biophoto Associates / Science Source Cleveland Clinic: "Blistering Diseases." DermNet New Zealand: "Intravenous immunoglobulin," "Mucous membrane pemphigoid." National Health Service (U.K.): "Bullous pemphigoid." National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: "Pemphigus." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Autoimmune Blistering Diseases." Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.