Plaque is the sticky, colorless film of bacteria that forms on teeth. It makes teeth "feel fuzzy" to the tongue and is most noticeable when teeth are not brushed. A growing body of research also finds that bacteria and inflammation in your mouth are linked to other problems, including heart attack and dementia, and may jeopardize your overall health. Plaque develops when foods containing carbohydrates (sugars and starches), such as milk, soft drinks, raisins, cakes, or candy are frequently left on the teeth. Bacteria that live in the mouth thrive on these foods, producing acids as a result. Over a period of time, these acids destroy tooth enamel, resulting in tooth decay.Plaquecan also develop on the tooth roots under the gum and cause breakdown of the bone supporting the tooth. Plaque buildup can also lead to gum disease: first gingivitis, the tender and swollen gums that sometimes bleed. Over time, severe periodontal (gum) disease can develop. Gum tissue pulls away from the teeth, allowing the bacteria to destroy the underlying bone supporting the teeth. Scientists have found links between periodontal disease and a number of other problems, including: What's behind the links? Experts can't say for certain, but they believe that oral bacteria can escape into the bloodstream and injure major organs. Inflammation is probably a common factor, experts say. Periodontal disease, marked by inflammation, may boost inflammation throughout the body. Inflammation, in turn, is an underlying problem in diseases including heart disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Over the years, many studies have found that people with gum disease are more likely to also have poor heart health, including heart attacks. A 2009 paper on the relationship between heart disease and gum disease was issued by the American Academy of Periodontology andThe American Journal of Cardiology. Its joint recommendations encourage cardiologists to ask their patients about any gum disease problems. In addition, periodontists are encouraged to ask their patients about any family history of heart disease as well as their ownheart health. If you have diabetes, you are more likely to have gum disease. Why? Again, inflammation may be partly to blame. And those with diabetes are more likely to get infections, including gum disease. If your diabetes is not under control, you are at even higher risk of gum disease. Gum disease has also been found to raise the risk of dementia later in life. Other researchers have found that periodontal problems may also be linked with milder cognitive impairment, such as memory problems that make activities of daily life more difficult. In one study, people who had the worst gum disease scored the worst on memory tests and calculations. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease marked by inflammation and painful joints. People with RA are more likely to have periodontal disease, and one study found that they had more missing teeth than people who don't have RA. Chronic inflammation is common to both conditions. Although scientists haven't found evidence that one condition causes the other, a 2009 study found that people with a severe form of RA had less pain, swelling, and morning stiffness after their periodontal disease was treated. Studies on the link between periodontal disease and preterm birth have had conflicting results. Some show that women with gum disease are more likely to deliver a baby before term, which sets up the baby for health risks. Others have not found a link. Studies are ongoing. Other research has found that treatingperiodontaldisease in pregnant women helps them carry their infants to term. One study showed that women with periodontal disease who completed treatment before the 35th week were less likely than those who did not get treatment to deliver their babies early. To prevent plaque buildup, brush your teeth at least twice a day with a soft, rounded-tip bristled toothbrush. Pay particular attention to the space where the gums and teeth meet. Use a fluoride-containing toothpaste. How to brush your teeth.Hold your toothbrush at a 45-degree angle to your gums while you brush. Use gentle, circular strokes about a tooth wide. Cover your whole mouth -- outer and inner surfaces, and tops of your teeth. Make sure to brush your tongue to scrape away bacteria and freshen your breath as well. Spend 2 full minutes on brushing. You should also floss between teeth at least once a day to remove food particles and bacteria. Some of the best dental floss options include: Sugary foods and acidic foods cause decay. Eat them sparingly, and you’ll avoid problems. The worst offenders include: When you do treat yourself to one of these, drink plenty of water afterward to wash away bits of food and keep yourmouth moist. Try not to snack between meals, and brush after you eat to keep your whites pearly. If you aren’t near your toothbrush after a meal, chew sugarless gum.   SOURCES: American Dental Association: "Plaque," "Cleaning Your Teeth and Gums," "Tooth Decay," “Brushing Your Teeth,” “Flossing,” “What is the best time to floss -- before brushing or after?” David Cochran, PhD, past president, American Academy of Periodontology; professor and chair, Department of Periodontics, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio. Sally Cram, DDS, periodontist, Washington, D.C.; consumer advisor, American Dental Association. American Academy of Periodontology: "Gum Disease and Diabetes," "Inflammation: Connecting the Mouth and Body?" "Journal of Periodontology and the American Journal of Cardiology develop joint clinical recommendations," "Frequently Asked Questions," "Healthy Gums and a Healthy Heart: The Perio-Cardio Connection." Offenbacher, S.Journal of Periodontology,October 1996; vol 67: pp 1103-1113. Seymour R.British Dental Journal,May 23, 2009; vol 206: pp 551-552. Radnai, M.Journal of Dental Research, March 2009; vol 88: pp 280-284. Noble, J.Journal of Neurology and Neurosurgery Psychiatry, online May 5, 2009. Kaisare, S.British Dental Journal,Aug. 11, 2007; vol 203: pp 144-145. Srinivas, S.American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology,May 2009; vol 200: p 497 and e1-8. Smolik, I.Compendium of Continuing Education in Dentistry,May 2009; vol 30: pp 188-90, 192, 194, 198, 210. Kamer, A.Alzheimer's & Dementia,July 2008; vol 4: pp 242-50. Wang, T.Journal of Clinical Periodontology,May 2009, vol 36: pp 372-379. Ortiz, P.Journal of Periodontology,2009, vol 80: pp 535-540. Mercado, FB.Journal of Periodontology, June 2001; vol 72: pp 779-787. National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research: “Plaque: What it is and how to get rid of it.” American Dental Hygienists Association: “Saliva — your mouth’s most powerful natural defense against decay.” Nadia Armentrout, DDS, Loudoun Smile Center, Ashburn, VA. Atusha Patel, DMD, All Dental Care, Marietta, GA. University of Rochester Medical Center: “The Best and Worst Foods for Your Teeth.” Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.