Polio, an infectious disease caused by a virus that lives in the throat andintestinal tract, was once the leading cause of disability in the U.S. Since the introduction of the poliovaccinein 1955, the disease has been eradicated in the U.S. But the disease is still common in some developing countries and until it is eradicated worldwide, the risk of it spreading to the U.S. still exists. For that reason, the polio vaccination remains one of the recommended childhood immunizations. In most parts of the U.S., polio immunization is required before a child can start school. If you had the polio vaccination prior to 2000, you may have received the oral polio vaccine (OPV), which was made from a live poliovirus. Although the live virus vaccine was highly effective at protecting against polio, a few cases of polio per year were caused by the oral vaccine itself. In 2000, the U.S. switched to the inactivated polio vaccine (IPV). Using an inactive (dead) form of the virus that cannot cause polio, the IPV is given as a shot in the arm or leg. Most people should get the polio vaccine when they are children. Children should be vaccinated with four doses of IPV at the following ages: IPV may be given at the same time as other vaccinations. Because most adults were vaccinated as children, routine polio vaccination is not recommended for people ages 18 and older who live in the U.S. But three groups of adults at higher risk for coming into contact with the poliovirus should consider polio vaccination. They are: If you fall into any of these three groups you should speak to yourhealth careprovider about the polio vaccination. If you have never been vaccinated against polio, you should get three doses of IPV: If you have had one or two doses of polio vaccine in the past you should get the remaining one or two doses. It doesn't matter how long it has been since the earlier dose or doses. You should not receive the polio vaccine if: Although no side effects have been reported inpregnantwomen who have received the vaccine, pregnant women should avoid the vaccine if possible. Pregnant women who fall into one of the groups of adults listed above should speak with their doctors about receiving an IPV according to the recommended schedule for adults. People who are moderately or severely ill should usually wait until they have recovered before receiving the vaccine. Some people who get the polio shot get a sore, red spot where the shot was given, but otherwise the vaccine is very safe. Most people don't have any problems with it at all. However, the polio vaccine, like any medicine, could potentially cause serious problems, such as a severe allergic reaction. The risk that the vaccine could cause any serious harm is extremely small. SOURCES: CDC web site: "Program in Brief: 'Global Polio Eradication;" "Polio Disease - Questions and Answers;" and "Polio Vaccine: What You Need to Know." Immunization Action Coalition: "Polio Vaccine Questions and Answers." Medline Plus Medical Encyclopedia: "Polio immunization (vaccine)." Boosters needed to protect and maintain their health. Vaccines children should get and when they’re needed. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.