Polycystic ovary syndrome, orPCOS, is a hormonal condition that can happen during childbearing years. It can affect your ability to have a child (your doctor will call it yourfertility). It can also: You can get treatments for the symptoms. And you could be able toget pregnant, although you may need to take medicines to improve your fertility. Some people with PCOS have cysts on their ovaries. That’s why it’s called “polycystic.” But the name is misleading because many people with PCOS don’t have cysts. When you have PCOS, your reproductive hormones are out of balance. This can lead to problems with your ovaries, such as not having your period on time or not getting it at all. Your body makes hormones to make different things happen. Some affect your menstrual cycle and are tied to your ability to have a baby. The hormones that play a role in PCOS include:  The most common PCOS symptoms are missed, irregular, infrequent, or prolonged periods. Other symptoms include:  Doctors don’t know all of the reasons why some people get PCOS. You might be more likely to have PCOS if your sister or mother also has it. It could also be related to problems that make your body produce too muchinsulin, which can affect your ovaries and their ability to ovulate (or release eggs).  Long-term low-grade inflammation may also play a role. White blood cells produce substances to fight infection, and that can cause the ovaries to produce androgens. Most people with PCOS have high levels of androgens. Transgender men (also known as female-to-male transsexual people, or FTMs) are highly prone to getting PCOS. Hormone therapy may or may not be a factor in that. That’s because so many other things – including insulin resistance, metabolic syndrome, and high levels of androgens – come into play with PCOS. In fact, some studies have shown that while hormone therapy can cause changes to the ovaries in transgender men, it doesn’t necessarily cause PCOS. If you have PCOS and your androgen levels are too high, you have higher odds for a number of complications. These can differ from person to person and include: Trouble getting pregnant.Cysts in the ovaries can interfere withovulation. That’s when one of your ovaries releases an egg each month. If a healthy egg isn’t available to be fertilized by asperm, you can’tget pregnant. You may still be able toget pregnantif you have PCOS. But you might have to take medicine and work with a fertility specialist to make it happen. Insulin issues and diabetes.Insulin resistancemay cause your body to make too many androgens. If you haveinsulin resistance,the cells in your muscles, organs, and other tissues don’t absorbblood sugarvery well. As a result, you can have too much sugar moving through your bloodstream. This is calleddiabetes, and it can cause problems with your cardiovascular and nervous systems. PCOS can also cause gestational diabetes (diabetes when you’re pregnant). Metabolic syndrome.This group of symptoms raises the risk ofcardiovascular disease. The symptoms includehightriglycerideand low HDL (“good”)cholesterol levels,high blood pressure, and highblood sugar levels. Other common complications of PCOS include:  No single test can diagnose PCOS. Your doctor will start by asking about your symptoms and medical history and by doing a physical exam, and possibly a pelvic exam. They might give you blood tests to measure your hormone levels, blood sugar, and cholesterol. An ultrasound can check your ovaries for cysts, look for tumors, and measure the lining of your uterus. If you aren’t planning to get pregnant, your doctor might prescribe hormonal birth control, like the skin patch or the pill. These medications can help lower your risk of endometrial cancer, get your periods on track, clear up acne, and lessen extra body hair. If you do want to get pregnant, fertility medications can help your ovaries release eggs. Ask your doctor about medications to treat body hair and acne. You should also see your doctor if you’re having: These symptoms might not be caused by PCOS but could signal other serious health issues. PCOS causes a woman’s body to produce higher-than-normal levels of androgens. These are hormones that are usually thought of as male hormones, because men have much higher levels of androgens than women. Androgens are important in the development of male sex organs and other male traits. In women, androgens are usually converted into the hormoneestrogen. Ovulation problems High levels of androgens get in the way of the development of your eggs and the regular release of your eggs. This process is calledovulation. If a healthy egg isn’t released,spermcan’t fertilize it, meaning you can’tget pregnant. PCOS can cause you to miss your menstrual period or haveirregular periods. This can be one of the first signs that you may have a problem such as PCOS. Regulating your period Your doctor may prescribebirth control pillsthat contain lab-made versions of the hormonesestrogenand progestin. These pills can help regulate your menstrual cycle by reducing androgen production. If you cannot tolerate a combinationbirth control pill, your doctor might recommend a progestin-only pill. You take this pill for about 2 weeks a month, for about 1-2 months. It’s also designed to help regulate your period. Medicines to help you ovulate You won’t be able to get pregnant while you’re taking birth control pills for PCOS. But if you need help ovulating so that you can becomepregnant, certain medicines may help:  In general, living a healthier lifestyle with a better diet, regularexercise, nosmoking, less stress, and control ofdiabetesand other medical conditions should improve your fertility odds. Managing weight Not all people who have PCOS are overweight, but many are. For some women, gaining a lot ofweightcan affect their hormones. In turn,losing weight, if you’reobeseoroverweight, may help get your hormones back to normal levels. Losing 10% of your body weight may help your menstrual cycle become more predictable. This should help you get pregnant. Your doctor may recommend a diet that’s lower in calories and fat and watching the size of your portions. But losing weight is not easy for everyone. A nutritionist or dietitian may be able to help. Also, keeping a journal of your meals and snacks or using an app to help track your food can make things easier. Managing blood sugar Many people with PCOS also have insulin resistance. That’s when your body doesn’t use insulin the way it should. Insulin keeps your blood sugar levels steady. To manage your blood sugar, your doctor may suggest eating foods that are lower in sugar and certain carbohydrates (carbs).  Some carbs are good for you, like vegetables and fruit. But you should avoid others, which are found in processed food, white flour, rice, potatoes, and sugar. Eating other healthy foods – poultry and other lean meats, fish, and whole grains – can help with your blood sugar levels, too. Exercising Regular exercise can help burn calories and increase your muscle mass. This can help decrease insulin resistance, which can lower the androgens in your body. That, in turn, can help with your PCOS. SOURCES: Womenshealth.gov: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS),” “PCOS: Complications,” “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Treatments and Drugs.” Hormone Health Network: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.” PCOS Awareness Association: “PCOS,” “PCOS treatments.” UCLA Health: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS).” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS).” International Journal of Molecular Sciences: “Chronic Inflammation in PCOS: The Potential Benefits of Specialized Pro-Resolving Lipid Mediators (SPMs) in the Improvement of the Resolutive Response.” NYU Langone Health: “Lifestyle Changes for Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.” Endocrinology: “Impact of Exogenous Testosterone on Reproduction in Transgender Men.” Human Reproduction: “Excessive androgen exposure in female-to-male transsexual persons of reproductive age induces hyperplasia of the ovarian cortex and stroma but not polycystic ovary morphology,” “Association between polycystic ovary syndrome and female-to-male transsexuality.” Endocrine Practice:“Exogenous Testosterone Does Not Induce or Exacerbate the Metabolic Features Associated With Pcos Among Transgender Men.” Endocrinologia y Nutricion:“Prevalence of hyperandrogenism and polycystic ovary syndrome in female to male transsexuals.” Cleveland Clinic: “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome.” Women’s Health Resource Center: “Androgens.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.