Polycythemia vera(PV) is ablood cancerthat begins in the marrow of your bones, the soft center where new blood cells grow. It causes your marrow to make too many red blood cells so your blood is too thick. You may be more likely to have clots, astroke, or aheart attack. This disease gets worse slowly, usually over many years. It can be life-threatening if you don't get treatment, but the right care can help you live a long life. Most people who have PV don’t get diagnosed until they’re 60 or older, usually after a routine blood test. But it can happen at any age. Men get it more often than women. It's common to worry when you find out that you havecancer. Remember that everyone is different and that all cancers aren’t the same. With the support of your doctor, family, friends, and other people who have polycythemia vera, you’ll be in the best position to manage it. Your bone marrow makes three types ofblood cells: Red blood cells carry oxygen, white ones fight infections, and platelets clot your blood to stop bleeding. Most people with polycythemia vera have too many red blood cells. But it can also cause you to have too many white blood cells and platelets. PV is caused by a gene (either JAK2 or TET2) that doesn’t work the way it should. Most likely, the problem happened over the course of your life. Rarely, parents can pass these faulty genes to children. At first, you may not notice any problems. When they do show up,polycythemia vera symptomscan include: You may also feel pressure or fullness below your ribs on your left side. This might mean PV has enlarged yourspleen, an organ that helps filter your blood. Blood clotscan cause a heart attack, astroke, ordeep vein thrombosis(DVT). They might also make your liver or spleen larger. If your organs don’t get enough blood, you could havechest painorheart failure. Having too many red blood cells might cause stomachulcers,gout, orkidney stones. PV can also lead to more serious blood diseases like acuteleukemiaor myelofibrosis. Acute leukemia is a blood cancer that gets worse quickly. Myelofibrosis is a condition in which your bone marrow fills with scar tissue. Your doctor will start with aphysical exam, including a check of your spleen. They’ll ask about your symptoms and see if your face is unusually red. You may have some blood tests, including: You may also need abone marrow biopsy.The results can show your doctor if your bone marrow makes too many blood cells. For this test, your doctor will take samples of your marrow, usually from the back of your hipbone. You lie down on a table and get a shot that will numb the area. Then, your doctor uses a needle to take out a small amount of bone marrow. It's an outpatient procedure, which means you don't have to stay overnight in a hospital. You can get it done in a clinic, a hospital, or your doctor's office. Questions for your doctor Before your appointment, it's a good idea to make a list of things to ask your doctor, such as:  If you don't have many symptoms, you might not need treatment for PV right away. Your doctor will keep a close watch on you. If you do need treatment, it will be aimed at lowering the amount of red blood cells your body makes and preventingblood clotsand other complications. Your options include: Phlebotomy.This is often the first treatment for people who have polycythemia vera. Your doctor takes blood from your vein so you have fewer blood cells. It's a lot like donating blood. After it's done, your blood will be thinner, and it’ll flow more easily. You'll usually feel better, too. Some symptoms will ease, like headaches or dizziness. Your doctor will decide how often you need phlebotomy. Some people with PV don’t need any other treatment for many years. Low-doseaspirin.This keeps platelets from sticking together. That makes you less likely to get blood clots, which in turn makes heart attacks or strokes less likely. Most people with polycythemia vera take low-dose aspirin. Medicine to lower blood cells.If you need more help, your doctor may prescribehydroxyurea(Droxia,Hydrea), a pill that lowers your red blood count and eases symptoms. Other drugs likeinterferonalfa (IntronA) orropeginterferon alfa-2b-njft(Besremi) help yourimmune systemcut back on making blood cells. You might takebusulfan(Busulfex,Myleran) orruxolitinib(Jakafi) if hydroxyurea isn’t helpful or if it causes severe side effects. If you have itching that doesn't go away, your doctor may give youantihistamines. Keep yourself comfortable and as healthy as possible during treatment:  There's no cure, but the right treatment can help you manage this disease for many years. Talk to your friends and family about what you’re dealing with. You may also want to join a support group for people who’ve been in your position. The MPN Research Foundation has more information about polycythemia vera. It can also help you find support groups. SOURCES: FamilyDoctor.org: "Polycythemia Vera." National Cancer Institute: "Polycythemia Vera." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Polycythemia Vera." MPN Research Foundation: "Polycythemia Vera." University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics: "Polycythemia Vera." New York-Presbyterian Hospital: "Polycythemia Vera." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Polycythemia Vera." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "How Is Polycythemia Vera Diagnosed?" “Polycythemia Vera.” National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences: “Polycythemia Vera.” Mayo Clinic: “Polycythemia vera.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.