Polymyositis is a type of muscle disease called an inflammatory myopathy. It inflames your muscles and their related tissues, like thebloodvessels that supply them. It can cause muscle weakness andpain, often on both sides of your body. There’s no cure for this ongoing (chronic) condition, but there are treatments that can help with symptoms. No one knows the exact cause of polymyositis. But doctors do know that it’s an autoimmune condition, which means the body can attack its own tissues. This is what causes the problems. It’s more common in people with otherautoimmune diseaseslikelupusandrheumatoid arthritis. It’s also more common among people with HIV. Most people who have polymyositis get diagnosed between the ages of 30 and 60. It’s very rare in children, and it affects women more often than men. Risk factors for polymyositis include: The symptoms of polymyositis are caused byinflammationin the muscles. The muscle weakness affects both sides of the body equally. The condition tends to target the muscle groups that are closest to the trunk of the body -- the hips, shoulders, thighs, upper arms, upper back, and neck. If you have it, you may notice you have trouble lifting your arms over your head, walking up flights of stairs, rising from a chair, or carrying things. In some cases, it may be hard to swallow food, but this is unusual. You may or may not have pain in the areas where the muscles are weak. Over time, the muscles may atrophy, meaning they waste away or become less bulky. The condition often worsens slowly, and you might not notice symptoms for months. Muscle weakness may be one of the first symptoms you do notice. You may also feel you just can’t do all the things you used to. You may also have:  There are no simple tests to diagnose polymyositis. It often takes time before doctors know for sure you have it. Your doctor will consider your medical history, and your family’s, to rule out other conditions. You may also get tests such as: Polymyositis is a chronic condition. That means that once you have it, it sticks around. But there are ways to help manage it. Common treatments include: Ask your doctor about any questions you have, and for other ways to make your life easier. Complications that might come along with polymyositis include: The prognosis for polymyositis depends on how severe a case you have. Most people respond to treatment and get some of their muscle strength back. Some weakness may remain, and your symptoms could come back. While the condition is rarely life-threatening, you could wind up disabled if you don’t respond to treatment. Polymyositis also raises your risk for an autoimmune condition,cancer, or osteoporosis. SOURCES: Arthritis Foundation: “Myositis.” Muscular Dystrophy Association: “Polymyositis." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. “NINDS polymyositis information page.” National Organization for Rare Diseases: “Polymyositis.” Myositis Association: “Polymyositis,” “Practical concerns” and “Patients living with myositis.” Mayo Clinic: “Polymyositis.” Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Polymyositis.” Things you do each day could be causing your pain. Learn what happens during and after the procedure. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.