If you or your child hasPompe disease, it's important to know that each case is different, and that doctors have treatments to help manage it. Pompe disease happens when your body can't make a protein that breaks down a complex sugar, called glycogen, for energy. Too much sugar builds up and damages your muscles and organs. Pompe disease causes muscle weakness andtrouble breathing. It mostly affects theliver,heart, and muscles. You might hear Pompe disease called by other names such as GAA deficiency or type II glycogen storage disease (GSD). Although it can happen to anyone, it's more common in African-American people and some Asian groups. You get Pompe disease from your parents. To get it, you have to inherit two flawed genes, one from each parent. You can have one gene and not have symptoms of the disease. What symptoms you have, when they start, and how much trouble they are can be very different for different people. A baby between a few months old and age 1 has early-onset, or infantile, Pompe disease. This could look like: If you're older when symptoms start -- as late as an adult in your 60s -- it's known as late-onset Pompe disease. This type tends to move slowly, and it doesn't usually involve your heart. You might notice: Many symptoms are similar to other medical conditions. To help figure out what's going on, your doctor may ask: You may need to get tests, depending on what symptoms you have, to rule out other conditions. If your doctor thinks you might have Pompe disease, it's often confirmed with these tests: It can take about 3 months to diagnose Pompe disease in a baby. It can take as long as 7-9 years for kids and adults. After doctors are sure, it's a good idea to test family members for the gene problem, too. Early treatment, especially for babies, is critical to holding off the damage in the body. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) improves survival as well as cardiac, and motor function. Threemedicationsreplace the missing protein and help your body process sugar correctly. You take them by injection. Nexviazyme, for those 1 year of age and older with late-onset Pompe disease Living with Pompe disease can be challenging. You and your family may want to see a counselor to help you come to terms with what's happening, especially as your abilities change. A support group can also be a safe place to share your feelings and find understanding. Support groups can be a good source of practical tips, too. For example, if you have trouble eating, you can try adding thickeners to your food to make it safer to swallow. You might need to use a feeding tube to make sure you get enough nutrients. Because Pompe disease can affect many parts of the body, it's best to see a team of specialists who know the disease well and can help you manage your symptoms. This might include: Generally, the later in life the disease shows up, the slower it moves. Babies can be treated, but because their symptoms are more intense and progress quickly, they usually don't live for more than a year. With late-onset Pompe disease, the muscle weakness gets worse over time and will eventually lead to serious breathing problems, perhaps many years later. Although there is no cure, treatment can relieve symptoms and help peoplelive longer. You can find more information and connect with other people who have Pompe disease through the web site of theAcid Maltase Deficiency Association. SOURCES: NINDS: "NINDS Pompe Disease Information Page." NIH: "Pompe disease." Genetics Home Reference: "Pompe disease." Emory University: "Pompe Disease: What You Need to Know." Kishnani, P. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part C (Seminars in Medical Genetics), 2012. AGSDUS: "Glycogen and Glycogen Storage Diseases" and "Type II Glycogen Storage Disease." Duke Children's Hospital & Health Center: "Pompe Disease Clinical and Research Program." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.