Porn addiction is, in theory, when you can’t stop looking at porn, even if you want to. And the obsession gets to the point that it interferes with work, relationships, and other parts of daily life. It’s easy to understand how this could be a problem with the widespread availability of internet porn today. In 2019, for example, the popular site PornHub recorded 42 billion visits -- that’s 115 million a day. Scientists are debating if heavy use of pornography is anaddictionin the medical sense of the word. The World Health Organization added compulsive sexual behavior as a mental health disorder in 2018. And while it doesn’t single out a pornography (or any other) addiction, it does refer to repetitive sexual activities becoming a central focus of a person’s life to the point that they neglect their “health and personal care or other interests, activities, and responsibilities.” And a study of men who sought treatment for problematic pornography use (PPU) showed that their brains did respond to sexual images. That gives credence to experts who say that the samebrainactivity shown in drug oralcoholaddiction -- when circuits in your brain associated with reward, motivation, and memory get turned on -- is in those who use pornography a lot. But porn addiction isn’t recognized in theDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. That’s the book doctors use to diagnose mental disorders. And some study results dispute the idea that porn is related to addiction. One group of researchers found that watching porn didn’t activate the parts of the brain usually involved with addiction. In fact, brain activity in those areas decreased. Other scientists point out that studies so far have either been poorly organized or have struggled with defining what exactly would make this an actual addiction. Plus, some say it’s difficult to get a handle on how widespread the problem is, in part, because few users think the habit is a problem. Neither does the American Association of Sexuality Educators, Counselors and Therapists. The group says there’s little proof that either sex addition or porn addition are problems. In a position statement on the topic, the group cautions against making consensual sexual behavior a disorder. Whether it’s an addiction or not, those who use pornography regularly have intense urges or cravings for sex. They turn to porn when they’re anxious. They also tend to struggle at work and at home. Some experts believe there’s a link between heavy use of porn and dissatisfaction withrelationships. Definitions about how much porn is too much vary. But most experts agree that if it gets in the way of your day-to-day activities, you could be watching too much. For example, if: Because porn addiction is controversial in the medical/mental health community, there’s not a clear set of causes available. But there may be some clues in the causes of compulsive sexual behavior. Things that lead to porn addiction could include: Things that could make porn addition more likely include: Compulsive sexual behavior like porn addiction could also be more likely if you have: There is help if you feel your pornography habits are causing problems. The main type of treatment for compulsive sexual behavior is psychotherapy. You could try: Medications can help control brain chemicals linked to obsessive thoughts and actions. They include: You can also look into self-help and support group like Sex Addicts Anonymous or Sexaholics Anonymous. In addition to having people who understand what you’re going through, they can also point you tomental healthprofessionals trained in dealing with excessive porn use. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Treatment Referral Helpline at 800-662-HELP (800-662-4357) can point you to professionals in your area who can help. Not getting help for a porn addiction could lead to problems like: SOURCES: Kraus, S.Journal of Behavioral Addictions, published online Sept. 8, 2017. Kühn, S.JAMA Psychiatry, published online May 28, 2014. American Psychological Association: “Is pornography addictive?” Love, T.Behavioral Sciences, published online Sept. 18, 2015. American Society of Addiction Medicine: “Definition of Addiction.” Steele, V.Socioaffective Neuroscience & Psychology, published online July 16, 2013. Voon, V.PLoS One, published online July 11, 2014. Vaillancourt-Morel, M.The Journal of Sexual Medicine, January 2017. Grant, J.The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, September 2010. Mayo Clinic: “Cognitive behavioral therapy.” Sexaholics Anonymous: “Who Are We?” Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration: “Behavioral Health Treatment Services Locator.” University of California, Santa Barbara: “Am I Watching Too Much Pornography?” Fight the New Drug: “Pornhub’s Annual Report: Can You Guess 2019’S Top Searched Porn Terms?” Biological Psychology: “Modulation of late positive potentials by sexual images in problem users and controls inconsistent with “porn addiction.” Current Sexual Health Reports: “The Emperor Has No Clothes: A Review of the ‘Pornography Addiction’ Model.” Journal of Clinical Medicine: “Online Porn Addiction: What We Know and What We Don’t -- A Systematic Review.” American Association of Sexuality Educators Counselors & Therapists (AASECT): “AASECT Position on Sex Addiction.” ICD-11 for Mortality and Morbidity Statistics: “6C72 Compulsive sexual behaviour disorder.” Neuropsychopharmacology:“Can Pornography be Addictive? An fMRI Study of Men Seeking Treatment for Problematic Pornography Use.” Mayo Clinic: “Compulsive sexual behavior.” 13 sex-driver killers, See how much you know about sex. Is your sex life aging well? Why do orgasms feel good? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.