Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is a rare, complicated condition that affects many parts of your body. It stems from a problem with one of your chromosomes (a strand of DNA that carries your genes). It can cause physical issues, like extreme hunger and weak muscles, as well as learning and behavioral problems. Only about 1 in 10,000 to 30,000 people in the world have PWS. PWS usually happens because of genetic changes on a region of chromosome 15. There's no way to prevent it. But if you plan to have a baby, you and your partner can be screened for PWS risk. A head orbraininjury can also cause the syndrome. Ababymay show signs of PWS early on. They may have almond-shapedeyes, their head may get narrow at the temples, their mouth might turn down at the corners, and they might have a thin upper lip. He also may have these symptoms: In early childhood, kids with PWS start to show other signs. It affects a part of their brain called the hypothalamus -- this is what tells you you're full when you eat enough food. People with PWS don't get the feeling of being full, so the most common signs are nonstop hunger and weight gain. A child with PWS may always want more food, eat bigportions, or try to hide or store food to eat later. Some kids even eat food that's still frozen or in the garbage. Your child may also: These signs of PWS are less common, but some people have them: Because their sex organs don't develop, women with PWS may never get a period. Or they may start their periods much later than others. Men who have PWS may not have facial hair. They may have small sex organs, and their voices may not change in puberty. People who have PWS usually aren't able to have children. Your doctor can usually diagnose PWS with a blood test called a chromosomal analysis. This shows if there's a problem with the gene that can cause PWS. There's no cure, but if you have a child with PWS, you can help them stay at a healthy weight, have a good quality of life, and prevent health problems down the road. Their treatment will depend on the symptoms. If your child tries to grab and hide food, you might lock cabinets, the pantry, or the refrigerator. For teens with PWS, hormones like testosterone,estrogen, or human growth hormone (HGH) may help with small stature, poor muscle tone, or extra body fat.Hormone replacementmay build stronger bones and prevent osteoporosis later on. Antidepressants, like selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), may help ease behavior problems caused by PWS. Specialized therapy can help your child deal with sleep apnea, thyroid issues, and other symptoms common to this condition. Kids with PWS should get regulareye examsto check for vision problems. Your child's doctor should screen for scoliosis, hip dysplasia, orthyroid problems. The Prader-Willi Syndrome Association has online support groups and tips for parents. SOURCES: Foundation for Prader-Willi Research. Genetics Home Reference: "Prader-Willi Syndrome." Mayo Clinic: "Prader-Willi Syndrome." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Prader Willi Syndrome." Prader-Willi Syndrome Association.     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.