Just because you haveasthmadoesn't mean you can't have a healthy pregnancy. But you have to keep your asthma under control. About a third ofpregnantwomen with asthma will find their symptoms improve during pregnancy, a third will have worse asthma, and a third will have stable disease symptoms. If your asthma isn’t controlled, oxygen levels in yourbloodcould fall. That means yourbaby, who gets oxygen from your blood, won’t get enough either. Good control of asthma also lowers your risk forpregnancy complicationssuch as premature birth, low birth weight, andpreeclampsia(dangerouslyhigh blood pressureduring pregnancy). If you don’t control your asthma properly during pregnancy, you’re much more likely to harm yourself and yourbabythan if you use the right drugs to control your asthma. It’s OK to use an inhaler. Short-acting medications in your daily use inhaler, likealbuterol,levalbuterol,pirbuterol, andipratropium, are all safe for mother and baby. Also,treating asthmalowers your risk of attacks and helps make yourlungswork better. The best thing to do is to talk to your doctor, who will look at how severe your asthma is and what treatment is right for you while you're pregnant. Good asthma control is the key to a successful pregnancy. To lessen the impact of your condition on your unborn baby: Pregnancy could make your asthma worse. There’s no clear answer to this question. Your asthma could also stay the same or improve. In general, if your asthma is severe, chances are it may become a little worse during your pregnancy. On the other hand, if you were pregnant before and your asthma did not get worse, chances are that it will not get worse during the next pregnancy. Asthma is almost never a reason tonotget pregnant. But if you havesevere asthma, it’s worth talking to your doctorbefore you get pregnant. If your asthma is related toallergies, stay away from allergens. This may mean avoiding animal dander,dust mites, cockroaches,pollen, and indoormold. Tell yourallergistif you’re pregnant. You shouldn’t startallergy shotsif you’re pregnant. But if you’re already getting them, your doctor will probably continue them and monitor you for any problems. Theflu vaccineis recommended for pregnant women and people with asthma because they’re among groups at high risk for severeflucomplications, including death. Pregnant women should only get theflu shot(notthe nasal flu vaccine). In general, the same asthma treatment that’s OK when you’re pregnant is OK when you go intolaborand when youbreastfeedyour baby. Talk to your doctor to make sure yourasthma medicineis safe to keep taking in these circumstances. SOURCES: American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: "Asthma, Allergies, and Pregnancy: Tips to Remember." American Lung Association: "Asthma." National Asthma Education and Prevention Program : "Managing Asthma During Pregnancy: Recommendations for Pharmacologic Treatment." National Jewish Health: “Asthma & Pregnancy: Medications.” Potential long-term health effects of uncontrolled asthma. See when you should call 911 or go to the ER. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.