Amiscarriageis the loss of ababybefore the 20th week ofpregnancy. The medical term for a miscarriage is spontaneous abortion. But it isn’t anabortionin the common meaning of the term. As many as 50% of all pregnancies end in miscarriage -- most often before a woman misses a menstrual period or even knows they’re pregnant. About 15%-25% of recognized pregnancies will end in a miscarriage. More than 80% of miscarriages happen within the first3 months of pregnancy. Miscarriages are less likely to happen after 20 weeks. When they do, doctors call them late miscarriages. Symptoms of a miscarriage include: If you have these symptoms, contact your doctor right away. They’ll tell you whether to come to the office or go to the emergency room. Most miscarriages happen when the unbornbabyhas fatal genetic problems. Usually, these problems are not related to the mother. Other problems that can increase the risk of miscarriage include: A woman has a higher risk of miscarriage if they: Cervical insufficiency.A miscarriage sometimes happens when the mother has a weakness of thecervix. Doctors call this a cervical insufficiency. It means the cervix can’t hold the pregnancy. This type of miscarriage usually happens in thesecond trimester. There are usually few symptoms before a miscarriage caused by cervical insufficiency. You may feel sudden pressure, your water might break, and tissue from the baby andplacentacould leave your body without much pain. Doctors usually treat an insufficient cervix with a "circling" stitch in the next pregnancy, usually around 12 weeks. The stitch holds your cervix closed until the doctor removes it around the time of delivery. If you never had a miscarriage but your doctor finds that you have cervical insufficiency they might add the stitch to prevent a miscarriage. There are different kinds of miscarriages, including: Threatened miscarriage.You’re bleeding and there’s the threat of a miscarriage, but your cervix hasn’t dilated. Your pregnancy will likely continue without any problems. Inevitable miscarriage.You’re bleeding and cramping. Your cervix is dilated. A miscarriage is likely. Incomplete miscarriage.Some tissue from the baby or the placenta leaves your body, but some stays in your uterus. Complete miscarriage.All the pregnancy tissues leave your body. This type of miscarriage usually happens before the 12th week of pregnancy. Missed miscarriage.Theembryodies or was never formed, but the tissues stay in your uterus. Recurrent miscarriage (RM).You lose three or more pregnancies in a row during the first trimester. This type of miscarriage only affects about 1% of couples trying to have a baby. To check whether you've had a miscarriage, your doctor will do: If the miscarriage is complete and your uterus is empty, you probably won’t need further treatment. Sometimes all the tissue doesn’t come out. If that happens, your doctor might do adilation and curettage(D&C) procedure. They’ll dilate your cervix and gently remove any remaining tissue. There are also medications you can take that cause any tissue left in your uterus to leave your body. This may be a better option if you want to avoid surgery. If it’s later in the pregnancy and thefetushas died in the womb, the doctor will inducelabor and delivery. When the bleeding stops, you should be able to go back to your normal activities. If your cervix dilated on its own but you’re still pregnant, you could have a condition known as incompetent cervix. Your doctor might do a procedure to close it called cerclage. If yourbloodtype is Rh negative, the doctor may give you a blood product called Rh immune globulin (Rhogam). This prevents you from developingantibodiesthat could harm your baby or any future pregnancies. You may get blood tests, genetic tests, or medication if you’ve had more than two miscarriages in a row (recurrent miscarriage). To diagnose this condition, your doctor might use tests like: If you've had two miscarriages in a row, use a form ofbirth controland talk to your doctor about tests to find the cause Bleeding and mild discomfort are common symptoms after a miscarriage. If you have heavy bleeding with fever,chills, orpain, contact your doctor right away. These may be signs of an infection. Besides the physical effects, you may also feel a range of emotions, from sadness and guilt togriefand worry about future pregnancies. What you’re feeling is normal. Let yourself grieve. If you’re up to it, talk to people in your life who are supportive like your partner, a friend, or family member. You can also talk to a professionalmental health counselor. Pregnancy loss support groups may also be a valuable resource to you and your partner. Ask your doctor for more information about these resources. And remember that everyone heals at a different pace and in different ways. You can get pregnant after a miscarriage. At least 85% of women who have one go on to have normal pregnancies and births. Having a miscarriage doesn’t mean you have a fertility problem. On the other hand, about 1%-2% of women may have repeated miscarriages (three or more). Some researchers believe this is related to an autoimmune response. If you've had two miscarriages in a row, you should stop trying to conceive, use a form ofbirth control, and ask your doctor to do tests to figure out what’s causing the miscarriages. Discuss the timing of your next pregnancy with your doctor. Some experts say you should wait a certain amount of time (from onemenstrual cycleto 3 months) before you try again. While this is not a widespread practice, to prevent another miscarriage the doctor may suggest treatment with progesterone, a hormone that helps the embryo implant and supports early pregnancy in your uterus. Taking time to heal both physically and emotionally after a miscarriage is important. Above all, don't blame yourself.Counselingis available to help you handle your loss. Most miscarriages happen because there’s a problem with the pregnancy. You can’t prevent them. If your doctor does testing and finds a problem, treatment options may be available. If you have an illness, treating it can improve your chances for a successful pregnancy. One step you can take is to get as healthy as you can before you try to have a baby:  SOURCES: The March of Dimes. National Institutes of Health. American Family Physician: “Early Pregnancy Loss.” Mayo Clinic: “Miscarriage.” Stanford Children’s Health: “Coping with Miscarriage.” Miscarriage Association: “Your feelings after miscarriage.” Tommy’s: “Preventing miscarriage.” FamilyDoctor.org: "Bleeding in Early Pregnancy." Cleveland Clinic: "Miscarriage." KidsHealth: "Miscarriage." Merck Manual: "Miscarriage." eMedicineHealth: “Miscarriage.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.