Premature laboris also called preterm labor. It’s when your body starts getting ready for birth too early in your pregnancy. Labor is premature if it starts more than 3 weeks before yourdue date. Premature labor can lead to an early birth. But the good news is that doctors can do a lot to delay an early delivery. The longer your baby gets to grow inside you -- right up to your due date -- the less likely they are to have problems after birth. Lots of things can increase your risk of premature labor. Some of them are: To stop premature labor, you need to know the warning signs. Acting fast can make a big difference. Call yourmidwifeor doctor right away if you have: Some of these may be hard to tell apart from normal symptoms of being pregnant, like backache. But you can't be too cautious. Get any possible warning signs checked out. Checking for contractions is a key way of spotting early labor. Keep in mind that many women have harmless false labor calledBraxton Hicks contractions. These are usually erratic, don't get closer together, and stop when you move around or rest. They are not part of labor. If you're not sure about the type of contractions you’re feeling, get medical advice. If your doctor or midwife thinks you're going into premature labor, you probably need to go to the hospital. Once you arrive, a doctor, midwife, or nurse will: If you are diagnosed with premature labor, you may need treatment, which may include: If your labor has kept up and can’t be stopped, your doctor or midwife will get ready to deliver your baby. They may also do this when you have an infection of the amniotic fluid and uterus or an illness such as severepreeclampsiaor eclampsia (high blood pressurethat happens during pregnancy). A baby may also be delivered early if it’s not doing well, if you haveplacenta previa(a placenta covering the cervix) that bleeds a lot, if you have placental abruption (detached placenta), or if certain birth defects or malformations are found. If doctors say you’re not in premature labor, you can go home. Despite the popular belief,bed restdoesn't seem to help prevent preterm birth and has risks of its own. The most important things you can do to help have ahealthy babyare to be in the best of healthbefore you get pregnantand to get prenatal care. It may not be possible to avoidpreterm laborand preterm birth, but these steps may help: Your doctor will check you for risk factors of premature delivery and discuss which precautions you should take. Measuring the length of thecervixusing a specialtransvaginal ultrasoundprobe can help predict your risk of delivering prematurely. This is usually done between 20 and 28 weeks ofpregnancy, if necessary. Recent studies have shown that treatment with a hormone calledprogesteronecan prevent preterm birth in certain women. Vaginal progesterone is given to pregnant women found to have a short cervix. And women who’ve had a preterm birth before and who are pregnant with one baby can get progesterone shots throughout pregnancy to lower their risk. About 1 in 10 babies born in the U.S. are preemies. Most preemies do well as they get older and catch up to their full-term peers in time. But these kids do have a higher risk of problems. Premature babies grow more slowly than babies born at full-term. They may be slower to roll onto their back, speak, or grasp and hold objects with their hands. They have a higher risk of certain long-term health problems, includingautism, intellectual disabilities,cerebral palsy,lungproblems, andvisionandhearing loss. Other kids have behavior issues later on. Some have emotional outbursts or are hyperactive. They may have learning or reading problems in school. The earlier a baby is born, the more likely they are to have problems. Those born after 7 months usually need a short stay in the hospital’s neonatal intensive care unit (NICU.) Babies born earlier than that face much bigger challenges. They will need specialized care in the NICU. Once you're both home from the hospital, watch for signs that you may need to call your doctor’s office or take your infant to the emergency room. Nursing.Your little one may eat slowly and not be able to take in as much milk or formula as a full-term baby. You’ll feed them more often, about every 3 or 4 hours. If they refuse to eat, call your doctor or nurse. If your baby has a hard time learning to breastfeed, ask for help from your nurse, doctor, or a lactation consultant. Sleeping.Your baby may be sleepier than full-term infants. They may even sleep through feedings. Wake your baby when it’s time to eat. Put them on their back to sleep. Breathing.Call your doctor or 911 if you notice they are having a hard time breathing. Body temperature.Preterm babies don’t have as much body fat to keep their temperature normal. Keep your infant away from cold drafts. Keep their room warm and cozy. In winter, dress them in layers to keep them warm. Jaundice.If your baby’s skin or eyes are yellow, or they have trouble eating, it may be a sign of this condition. It means their liver can’t clear their blood of something called bilirubin. Make sure they have checked for jaundice before you leave the hospital, and call your doctor if you notice any symptoms. This can lead to brain damage if not treated early. Infections.Preterm babies don’t have a fully developed immune system. That puts them at higher risk for infections. Watch for symptoms of illness like high fever or breathing problems. Call your doctor if you think your child needs treatment for an infection. SOURCES: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: "Frequently Asked Questions: Preterm Labor," "How to Tell When Labor Begins." ACOG Practice Bulletin Clinical Management Guidelines for Obstetrician-Gynecologists: “Nausea and Vomiting of Pregnancy.” CDC: "National Prematurity Awareness Month," "Preterm Birth." Cleveland Clinic: "Premature Labor." Family Doctor: "Caring for Your Premature Baby." Hofmeyr, G.Cochrane Collaboration, 2012. March of Dimes: "Preterm labor and birth: A serious pregnancy complication," "Your premature baby." National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: “Who Is at Risk for Preterm Labor and Birth?” "Preterm Labor and Birth." Office on Women’s Health: “Pregnancy Complications.” Sinha, P.Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 2008. FDA. Mayo Clinic. Robin Elise Weiss, BirthCare Network. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine.Obstetrics and Gynecology. 2013. Loftin, R.Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Winter 2010. Association of Women’s Health, Obstetric, and Neonatal Nurses: “What Parents of Late Pre-term (Near-Term) Infants Need to Know.” Child Trends Databank: “Preterm Births.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “Preemie Milestones.” Sidelines National Support Network.     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.