You're standing in the snack aisle of the supermarket. Lying at your feet is yourtoddler, who has just been informed (by you) that, no, they cannot have the Cinderella fruit snacks. Their face has turned a shade somewhere between red and purple. Their fists are pounding the floor in fury as they emit a shriek that can be heard in the farthest reaches of the parking lot. The other shoppers are gaping at this spectacle as you wish desperately for a hole to open in the floor and swallow you up. Many a parent has been through a scenario like this, although the tantrum might have taken a slightly different form; crying, hitting, kicking, stomping, throwing things, and breath holding are all popular tantrum techniques. Temper tantrumsare exceedingly common in children, especially between ages 1 and 4 -- the early part of which is sometimes called the "terrible 2s" -- when kids are still learning how to communicate effectively. More than half of young children will have one or more tantrums a week as they vent their frustrations and protest their lack of control. Although they are a normal part of thetoddlerrepertoire,temper tantrumscan be distressing to parents. When they occur infrequently, tantrums aren't a big deal and are best ignored. It's when they become regular or intense that parents need to look into what's causing them and find ways to stop them. Some children are more prone to tantrums, particularly kids who are intense, hyperactive, or moody, or kids who don't adapt well to new environments. For mosttoddlers, tantrums are simply a way of getting out their frustration and testing limits (Will mommy buy me that toy if I scream really loud?). The smallest things, from asking them to take a bath while they're in the middle of watchingSesame Streetto requesting that they share a favorite stuffed animal with a younger sibling, can set off young children. Any situation that involves change may spawn a tantrum. Addfatigueorhungerto the equation and children, their threshold for tolerance even lower, are even more likely to throw a tantrum. The easiest way to stop a temper tantrum is to give the child what they want. Obviously, that strategy won't do you any good in the long run, because your child will constantly go into tantrum mode whenever they want something. The first step in defusing a temper tantrum is to keep your own temper in check. You're not going to get anywhere with your child if both of you are screaming at each other.Spankingyour child is also not a good option, and it will only make the tantrum worse. Take a deep breath, gain control over your emotions, and then discipline your child by calmly but firmly letting them know that tantrums are not acceptable behavior. If your child still won't calm down and you know the tantrum is just a ploy to get your attention, don't give in. Even if you have to walk through the supermarket dragging your screaming toddler, just ignore the tantrum. It is easier said than done, but stick to your guns and eventually the duration will lessen and they will know you are serious and this is not going to work. Once your child realizes the temper tantrum isn't getting them anywhere, they'll stop screaming. If your child is upset to the point of being inconsolable or out of control, hold them tightly to calm them down. Tell them gently that you love them but that you're not going to give them what they want. If that doesn't work, remove them from the situation and put them in a time-out for a minute or two to give them time to calm down. The general guideline for the length of a time-out is one minute per year of the child's age. It’s also OK for you to take a break if you feel like you’re losing control. Put your baby in a safe spot, like a crib or playpen, and take a few minutes to regroup. Go into another room and listen to music, call a friend, or do something relaxing. Instead of having to stop a temper tantrum after it starts, prevent it by following these tips:  Praise your child for getting it right. When they stay cool in a situation that would normally have triggered a tantrum, tell them they did a good job of controlling their temper. Even when you discipline your baby, be sure to let them know that you love them no matter what. Positive comments help boost self-esteem. If temper tantrums are becoming more frequent, they haven't stopped by around age 4, or your child is in danger of hurting them or others, it's time to call your child's health care provider. SOURCES: National Association of School Psychologists: "Temper Tantrums: Guidelines for Parents." KidsHealth: "Temper Tantrums," "Nine Steps to More Effective Parenting." The Ohio State University Extension: "Temper Tantrums." University of Virginia Health System: "Temper Tantrums." Mayo Clinic: "Parenting tips: How to improve toddler behavior."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.