Ovens and grills help us stay fed. Heaters keep us warm. Cars take us where we want to go. And whenever we turn on devices that run on natural gas, charcoal, gasoline, wood, or other fuels, we have to use them the right way. Carbon monoxide, produced any time a fossil fuel burns, is a gas you can’t see or smell. Ovens, heaters and other devices put out little of it when they’re working properly. But if they’re out of order, or if people use them in the wrong places, the fumes can build up. This can be life-threatening. There are things you can do to stay safe. And battery-operated detectors that are easy to find at stores can warn us of trouble. Someone who is asleep can die fromcarbon monoxide poisoningwithout ever waking up. That’s all the more reason to make sure your home is safe. When you buy appliances that burn fuel, look for the seal of a testing agency such as UL. In your home, any equipment should be installed with vents running outdoors. Here are more tips: By keeping your eyes open, you may spot evidence that appliances are out of whack or something else is wrong. A few danger signals: If you see any of these, have a trained technician check them out and fix whatever needs it. These detectors are available at hardware stores and other retailers, and your home should have one or more. Buy alarms that are certified by a testing laboratory. Follow the instructions about installation and change the batteries twice a year at Daylight Savings Time. Here are a few other guidelines: If you inhale too much carbon monoxide, it builds up in your bloodstream, where it takes the place of the oxygen that belongs there. When yourheart,brain, or other vital organs are deprived of that oxygen, you’re in trouble. If the dangerous gas is getting into your system, you might: Carbon monoxide is especially dangerous for infants,pregnantwomen, and people with ailments such asemphysema(which damages the air sacs in yourlungs),asthmaorheart disease. Smaller amounts of the fumes can hurt them. If you think carbon monoxide is affecting you or your alarm sounds, move to fresh air -- either next to a window or open door, or outside. Make sure that everyone else in the house is also in the clear. If anyone has symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning, get emergency help. More than 20,000 Americans go to emergency rooms each year because of carbon monoxide poisoning, and more than 400 people die. Don’t go back into the house until it’s safe. Your fire department can help you figure that out. SOURCES: CDC: “Carbon Monoxide Poisoning.” Cleveland Clinic: “Carbon dioxide poisoning.” Mayo Clinic: “Carbon monoxide poisoning.” “Emphysema.” National Fire Protection Association: “Carbon monoxide.” U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission: “The Invisible Killer.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.