Cilia are tiny structures that can have a big impact on your health. They’re like little “fingers” (you can only see them through a microscope) that extend from your cells. Cilia help your cells move, which helps your body carry out important jobs like breathing and reproducing. Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare genetic disorder in which the cilia don’t work properly. About 1 in 15,000 people around the world has it. PCD mainly causes problems in yourrespiratory system. The cilia there are responsible for clearingmucusand bacteria from your airways. If they don’t work as they should, you can’t get rid of infections. This can cause a number of issues, including: Cilia start working in your body even before birth. In the womb, they’re involved in how your organs are arranged. About half of the people who have PCD have a condition doctors call “situs inversus.”It causes your internal organs to be reversed. A condition called “situs ambiguus,” or “heterotaxy,” is present in 12% of people who have PCD. It also involves misarranged organs -- namely, yourheart,liver, intestine, andspleen. PCD can also affect yourfertility. If the cilia and flagella (tails) ofspermdon’t work, they can’t get to where they need to go. About half of men with PCD areinfertile. In women, the cilia in the fallopian tubes might not be able to push an egg into the uterus. PCD is a genetic condition caused by a mutation (change) in any one of 32 genes that researchers have identified (so far). It’s what’s known as an “autosomal recessive disorder.” That means you get one mutated gene from each parent, and that both parents are carriers of the condition but don’t have any symptoms of it. Because PCD is genetic, there’s nothing you can do to lower your chances of getting it. The most obvious sign is constant respiratory infections from birth. But PCD is often missed or mistaken for something else. It’s often confused withasthma. Your pediatrician will refer you to a specialist. Your doctor will first look for signs of what’s called “chronic sinopulmonary disease.” This affects yoursinuses, ears, and lungs. Then they’ll check to see if you have reversed or rearranged organs. If you have PCD, your levels of nasal nitric oxide will be very low. That’s a gas you inhale from your nose andmouth. Your doctor might also use agenetic testto see if you have PCD. But that can be tricky because there are a number of genes that could possibly cause the defect. And, there’s more than one possible mutation on any of those genes. Your doctor will only diagnose PCD if you have a “positive” test result along with the symptoms. Note that a negative genetic test doesn’t mean youdon’thave PCD. Your doctor will address your major symptoms and figure out how much damage PCD has done to your body. There’s no cure for PCD, but there are treatments. Your doctor can: SOURCES: Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Foundation: “What Is PCD?” Ciliopathy Alliance: “Structure and Function of Cilia.” Genetics Home Resource: "Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia." Genetics and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.” Ciliopathy Alliance: “Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.” National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute: “What is Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia?” Mayo Clinic: "Autosomal Recessive Inheritance." U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Diagnosis, Monitoring, and Treatment of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: PCD Foundation Consensus Recommendations Based on State of the Art Review.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.