Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a disease that affects your bile ducts. Bile is a digestive fluid yourLivermakes. The ducts let it flow from yourliverto yourgallbladderand finally to your small intestine. There it helps break down fat from food. With PSC, your bile ducts become inflamed. This causes scars to form that block bile from traveling through them. As a result, it builds up inside yourliverand damages your liver cells. It also causes scar tissue to form in your liver. Over time, the scar tissue affects your liver's ability to work the way it should and can lead to cirrhosis and eventuallyliver failure. PSC can happen at any age. But it's more common in adults than in kids and affects more men than women. About 70% of people with PSC are male. PSC develops slowly. You may have it for years before you notice any symptoms. Some of the signs are: As PSC worsens, your bile ducts may become infected. This can lead tofever, chills, and pain in your belly. Doctors aren't sure what causes PSC. It may be a virus, bacteria, genes, or problems with your immune system. It's linked to inflammatory bowel disease, primarilyulcerative colitisand, less often,Crohn's disease. About 75% of people with PSC have ulcerative colitis. Doctors don't know how or why these conditions are connected. Your doctor will want to take a sample of yourbloodto check the levels of yourliver enzymes. Unusual levels of certain enzymes could be a sign that you have PSC. To confirm it, you'll have an imaging test called cholangiography to give your doctor a closer look at your bile ducts. There are several different types of cholangiography: No medications have been shown to help with PSC, but researchers are working on this. You may want to ask your doctor if you qualify for any drug therapy trials. These test medicines that aren't yet approved to treat PSC, and they may help with your symptoms or help control liver damage. If you have an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, your doctor may use special instruments through the endoscope to open blocked bile ducts. Otherwise, the goal is to help your symptoms and control complications that can occur. For example, your doctor may prescribemedicationsto ease itching,antibioticsto control an infection, or vitaminsupplementsto help with any deficiencies. If you have liver failure, you may need aliver transplant. Most people with PSC who have one have very good outcomes and quality of life afterward. SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: "Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis." American Liver Foundation: "Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis." National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: "ERCP." Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.