Pseudomyxoma peritonei(PMP) is a rare condition that usually starts with a tumor in yourappendix-- though the tumor also can be in your bowel,bladder, orovaries. Only about 1 in a million people get it. PMP may not cause any problems until the tumor grows and bursts out of the area where it started. When it enters yourabdomen(belly), more tumors form and make mucinous fluid, a jelly-like material. This eventually fills up your belly, which is why PMP is sometimes known as "jelly belly." When this fluid builds up in your abdomen, it can push on other body parts. That causes swelling and digestion problems. It can even block yourintestinesor cause them to fail. This can be very serious and even life threatening. Doctors don't really know what causes PMP. It doesn't run in families. And it doesn't seem to be linked to anything in the environment. Some doctors break PMP into two groups: You may not have any symptoms at first. But some of the following may appear over time: It can be hard to diagnose PMP because it may look and act like other diseases. Sometimes it's found by accident when you're being treated for something else. To find out if you have it, your doctor will examine you and ask questions about your symptoms. Then they'll want to get pictures of inside your belly and other areas of your body. One way to do this is by aCT scan. It takes a number of X-rays from different angles and puts them together to give more information. Sometimes you may take a special drink or get dye that makes the image easier to see. Amagnetic resonance imagingscan, or MRI, is another painless way to get a picture. It uses powerful magnets and radio waves to make detailed images. Other ways to diagnose PMP include: The best way to treat PMP depends on the type of tumor -- cancerous or noncancerous -- the size of the tumor, and how healthy you are. Your doctor may recommend: SOURCES: National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Pseudomyxoma Peritonei." McMillan Cancer Support: "Pseudomyxoma Peritonei (PMP)." Pseudomyxoma Survivor: "What is Pseudomyxoma Peritonei?" PMP Awareness Organization: "Frequently Asked Questions." Cancer Research UK: "Pseudomyxoma peritonei." Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.