Pulmonary hypertension is a life-threatening condition that gets worse over time, but treatments can help your symptoms so you can live better with the disease. It may take some planning, but plenty of people who have it find ways to do all the things they love, just as they did before they were diagnosed. Havingpulmonary arterial hypertension(PAH) means that you have high blood pressure in thearteriesthat go from yourheartto yourlungs. It's different from having regularhigh blood pressure. With PAH, the tiny arteries in yourlungsbecome narrow or blocked. It's harder forbloodto flow through them, and that raises theblood pressurein your lungs. Yourhearthas to work harder to pumpbloodthrough those arteries, and after a while the heart muscle gets weak. Eventually, it can lead to heart failure.  Sometimes doctors can't find a reason for high blood pressure in the lungs. In that case, the condition is called idiopathic pulmonary hypertension. Genes may play a role in why some people get it. In other cases, there is another condition that's causing the problem. Any of these illnesses can lead tohigh blood pressurein your lungs: You may not notice any symptoms for a while. The main one is shortness of breath when you're active. It usually starts slowly and gets worse as time goes on. You may notice that you can't do some of the things you used to without getting winded. Other symptoms include: If you have shortness of breath and see your doctor, they will ask you about your medical history. They may also ask you: Your doctor may order tests, including: Echocardiogram:Thisultrasoundpicture of the beating heart can check blood pressure in the pulmonary arteries. CT scan:This can show enlarged pulmonary arteries. A CT scan can also spot other problems in the lungs that could cause shortness of breath. Ventilation-perfusion scan (V/Q scan):This test can help find blood clots that cancause high blood pressurein the lungs. Electrocardiogram(EKG or ECG):An EKG traces the heart's activity and can show whether the right side of the heart is under strain. That's a warning sign of pulmonary hypertension. Chest X-ray:An X-ray can show if your arteries or heart are enlarged. Chest X-rays can help find other lung or heart conditions that may be causing the problems. Exercisetesting:Your doctor may want you to run on a treadmill or ride a stationary bike while you are hooked up to a monitor, so they can see any changes in your oxygen levels, heart function, lung pressure, or other things. Your doctor may also do blood tests to check forHIVand conditions likerheumatoid arthritisorlupus. If these tests show that you might have pulmonary hypertension, your doctor will need to do a right heart catheterization to be sure. Here's what happens during that test: Rightheart catheterizationis safe. The doctor will give you a sedative and use local anesthesia. You can usually go home the same day, although you will need someone to drive you home. You may want to write down a list of questions before your appointment, so you can make sure you ask your doctor everything you want to. It can also help to have a friend or family member with you to help you get the answers you want. Some possible questions are: Pulmonary hypertension varies from person to person, so your treatment plan will be specific to your needs. Ask your doctor what your options are and what to expect. First, your doctor will treat the cause of your condition. For example, if emphysema is causing the problem, you'll need to treat that to improve your pulmonary hypertension. Most people also get treatment to improve their breathing, which makes it easier to be active and do daily tasks. Oxygen therapy, when you breathe pure oxygen through prongs that fit in your nose, will help if you’re short of breath and have low oxygen levels in your blood. It helps you live longer when you have pulmonary hypertension. If you are at risk for blood clots your doctor will recommendblood thinners. Other medicines improve how well your heart works and keep fluid from building up in your body. If you have severe pulmonary hypertension, your doctor may prescribemedicationscalled calcium channel blockers. These medicines lower blood pressure in the lungs and the rest of the body. If calcium channel blockers aren’t enough, your doctor may refer you to a specialized treatment center. You may need more targeted therapies that can open up your narrowed blood vessels. They may be pills, medicines you breathe in, or drugs that are given through an IV. Options include: In more severe cases, or if medicines don't help, your doctor may recommend alung transplantor a procedure called atrial septostomy. A surgeon creates an opening between the right and left sides of the heart. This surgery can have serious side effects. One of the best things you can do for yourself is to stay active, even if you have shortness of breath. Regular exercise, like taking a walk, will help you breathe better and live better. Talk to your doctor first to find out what kind of exercise is best for you, and how much you should do. Some people may need to use oxygen when they exercise. Get plenty of rest, too. Pulmonary hypertension makes you tired, so get a good night's sleep and take naps when you need to. Just like anyone else, it's good for you to eat a healthy diet with lots of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. That's important for your overall health. A lot depends on what's causing your pulmonary hypertension. Treating an underlying condition will help you feel better. There's no cure for pulmonary hypertension, but the earlier it's diagnosed, the easier it is to live with. If you have idiopathic pulmonary hypertension -- the kind where doctors can't find a cause -- your symptoms may get worse over time. But treatment can slow down the progress of the disease and help you live longer. Remember that each person is different, and there are good treatments available. Work with your doctor to find what's right for you. ThePulmonary Hypertension Associationoffers in-depth information on everything from medications to tips on making daily tasks easier. It also has an active online support community. SOURCES: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "What Is Pulmonary Hypertension?" Pulmonary Hypertension Association: "Treatment,"  "About Pulmonary Hypertension." American Heart Association: "Pulmonary Hypertension - High Blood Pressure in the Heart-to-Lung System." Chest Foundation: "Learn About Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension." American Lung Asspociaiton: "Pulmonary Arterial Hypertension (PAH)." You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.