One of the most basic things your body does is get energy from your food and deliver it to your cells. It’s a lot like gassing up your car, but in this case, sugar provides the energy. Usually, ahormonecalledinsulincontrols the process. It tells the sugar when to move out of yourbloodand into your cells. If you have Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome, this process breaks down. Your body can’t use insulin like it needs to. It’s a very rare condition. Wheninsulincan’t do its job, it impacts how your body grows. And the effects start even before birth. Babies who have it tend to be smaller than usual and struggle to grow and gainweight. Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome is part a group of conditions that doctors call severeinsulin resistancesyndromes. These includeDonohue syndromeand type Ainsulin resistancesyndrome. Rabson-Mendenhal is a condition you get from your parents, and it happens because of a glitch in a gene called the INSR gene. Each of your cells has two copies of every gene. One copy comes from your mother and one from your father. When you have Rabson-Mendenhall, it means you have the glitch in both copies of the INSR gene. If only one copy has it, you won’t have the condition. So when a child gets Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome, it’s because each parent had one copy that was normal and one that had the glitch. Then, they both happened to pass the copy with the glitch onto the child, and 3 out of 4 times that doesn’t happen. Signs and symptoms may start to show in the first year of life and are more severe in some people than in others. It can cause problems with your: Other common signs and symptoms include: And it can lead to conditions such as: One of the challenges in telling whether someone has Rabson-Mendenhall is making sure it’s not a similar condition, such as Donohue syndrome. Your child’s doctor will do aphysical examand ask about their symptoms and health history. They’ll probably want to getbloodtests to check on your child’s blood sugar and insulin levels. Treating Rabson-Mendenhall usually requires a team of doctors, surgeons, dentists, and others. Your family may also want to seekcounselingto work through the emotions of having a rare disease. Since there’s no cure, treatment often focuses on specific symptoms, such as surgery to remove cysts or fix dental problems. Sometimes, doctors use high doses of insulin or certain drugs that help the body use insulin, but often these don’t work for very long. Experts are looking for better treatment options forhyperglycemia(highblood sugar) linked to severe insulin resistance. These treatments have shown some good results so far, though more research is needed: SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Diabetes Mellitus: An Overview.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Rabson-Mendenhall Syndrome,” “Leprachaunism.” National Institutes of Health, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences: “Rabson-Mendenhall Syndrome.” National Institutes of Health, National Library of Medicine: “Rabson-Mendenhall Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: “Down Syndrome.” Orpha.net: “Rabson-Mendenhall Syndrome.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.