Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome is a rare disease that can affect yourhair, nails,skin, sweat glands, andteeth. It’s caused by a problem with your genes, and it’s part of a larger group of conditions that doctors call “ectodermal dysplasia.” Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome has signs and symptoms that overlap extensively with those of ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate (AEC) syndrome, also called Hay-Wells syndrome. These two syndromes were classified as separate disorders until it was discovered that they both result from mutations in the same part of the same gene, TP63. Most researchers now consider Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome and AEC syndrome separate disorders that are part of the same disease spectrum. If you have it, it’s a lifelong condition. Although you can’t prevent or cure it, doctors can treat it. Each of your cells has two copies of every gene. One comes from your mother and one from your father. AEC is caused by a glitch in one of your genes, the TP63 gene. If either copy of your TP63 gene has the glitch, you’ll have AEC. Sometimes, you get AEC from your parents. But more often, it’s something you’re randomly born with. A parent with the glitch has a 50% chance of passing on the gene to a child. These can differ quite a bit from person to person. It even varies for people in the same family who have AEC. Common symptoms include: Usually, your doctor can tell you have AEC based on your symptoms, health history, and aphysical exam. You may also get agenetic testto check on the TP63 gene, but not all labs can do this test. Parents with a risk ofhaving a babywith AEC may be able to have their baby tested before birth. Doctors can treat many of the symptoms of AEC. You’ll work with a team that may include surgeons, skin doctors, dentists, eye doctors, and others. You and your family may also want to seekcounselingto work through the emotional challenges of having a rare disease. Treatments for AEC symptoms may include: SOURCES: National Institutes of Health, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences: “Rapp-Hodgkin Syndrome.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “AEC Syndrome.” National Foundation for Ectodermal Dysplasias: “Rapp Hodgkin and Hay Wells: The Same Disorder?,” “Ankyloblepharon-Ectodermal Defects-Cleft Lip and/or Palate.” Mayo Clinic: “Down Syndrome.” National Center for Biotechnology Information: “TP63-Related Disorders.” March of Dimes: “Cleft Lip and Cleft Palate.” University of California San Francisco: “Erosion.” American Academy of Implant Dentistry: “What Are Dental Implants?” KidsHealth.org: “What are Dentures?” National Organization for Rare Disorders: "AEC Syndrome." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.