Raynaud’s disease is whenbloodvessels in your fingers and toes temporarily overreact to low temperatures orstress. For most people, it isn’t a serious health problem. But for some, the reduced blood flow can cause damage. This condition is named for the French doctor who first identified it in 1862. You may hear it called by many names. There are two types:  You might notice:  When it’s cold, your body tries to conserve heat. One way it does that is to slow down blood flow to the areas farthest from yourheart-- your hands andfeet. To do that, the network of smallarteriesthat carry blood to those points gets narrower, moving them away from your skin. This is called the vasomotor response. If you have Raynaud’s, your response is off. Those arteries shrink more than normal, and faster than normal. That can make your fingers and toes feel numb and change color to white or blue. This usually lasts about 15 minutes. When the arteries relax and your body warms back up, your fingers feel tingly and turn red before returning to normal. You might have changes to genes that control your response, but doctors haven’t found a link between this and Raynaud’s. Secondary Raynaud’s works the same, but you get it as the result of another disease. Conditions that make you likely to get secondary Raynaud’s include:  As many as one in 10 people may have some form of Raynaud’s. Most have primary Raynaud’s. About one person in 100, or fewer, will have secondary Raynaud’s.  If your doctor thinks you have Raynaud’s, they’ll ask questions about your symptoms and look at your fingers and toes. They might also use a special magnifying glass called a dermoscope to check the blood vessels around your fingernails to see if they’re larger than normal or oddly shaped. If the doctor thinks your condition results from another health problem, they might take some of your blood to test in a lab. This lets them check for signs of an autoimmune disorder like lupus or rheumatoid arthritis. Treatment goals will include preventing attacks or limiting them when they do happen. That usually means keeping your hands and feet warm and dry, controllingstress, and getting regularexercise. Medication Your doctor might ask you to avoid some drugs, including over-the-counter cold medicines that containpseudoephedrine. They can make your symptoms worse by causing your blood vessels to narrow. If you have secondary Raynaud’s, your doctor might prescribe medicines to control yourblood pressureand relax your blood vessels. If you get sores on your skin as a result, you might need to apply a cream that contains one of these drugs. They include: Surgery If your condition doesn’t improve after these steps and you’re at risk of severe problems, like losing parts of your fingers or toes, your doctor might consider surgery. These procedures involve cutting the nerves to the blood vessels in your skin to limit how much they open and close. The doctor might also inject drugs into your hands or feet to block those nerves. Home Treatment for Raynaud’sThese steps can also help you control your condition:  No, but serious cases can cut off the blood flow to your skin and lead to tissue damage. A completely blocked artery can lead to skin sores (ulcers) or dead tissue (gangrene). It’s rare, but if this happens, the doctor might have to remove a finger or toe. SOURCES: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: “Raynaud’s Phenomenon.” American College of Rheumatology: “Raynaud’s Phenomenon.” JAMA Dermatology patient page: “Raynaud Phenomenon.” The Raynaud’s Association. The Mayo Clinic: “Raynaud’s Disease.” Raynaud’s Association: “Frequently Asked Questions.” U.S. National Library of Medicine Genetics Home Reference: “Raynaud phenomenon.” Harvard Health Publishing: “Cold fingers, cold toes? Could be Raynaud’s.” Cleveland Clinic: “Raynaud's Phenomenon: Treatment Options.” Things you do each day could be causing your pain. Learn what happens during and after the procedure. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.