Every child grows and learns at their own pace, and the range of what’s normal is pretty wide. It’s helpful, though, to know the signs that your child might not have the skills most other kids have at their age. Doctors call those problems developmental delays. Many delays aren’t serious, and most kids can catch up, especially when they get early treatment. The key is to get your child the help they need as soon as you think there’s a problem. If you wonder whether your little one is falling behind in emotional, mental, or physical growth, don't wait to find out. Talk to their doctor right away. There are many different types. Children might have problems with: These problems are the most common type of developmental delay. They sound similar, but they’re different types of issues. Speech means the sounds that come out of a person’s mouth. Children who have a speech delay may stutter or have trouble saying words the right way. Language refers to the meanings of sounds and gestures. Kids with language problems may have trouble expressing themselves or understanding others. Possible causes.A delay in these skills can happen for many reasons, including: What you can do.If you think your child has a problem with their speech or language, let their doctor know right away. The doctor will need to test their hearing. They’ll probably also suggest that your child see a professional who can diagnose and treat these delays, called a speech-language pathologist or speech therapist. This specialist will study how your child expresses themselves, including: If your child does have a delay, they might need speech therapy. A therapist can work with them on how to pronounce words and sounds, and strengthen the muscles in their face and mouth. You can also work with your child on speech and language: There’s no deadline for a child to start talking or using full sentences. But most kids reach speech and language milestones by a certain age. Let your child’s doctor know if they can’t do some of the following. Also, take note if your child loses skills they have already learned. By 3 years, kids usually: By 4 years, kids usually: By 5 years, kids usually: Some children can have trouble with movements that use a lot of muscles, such as playing ball, or with smaller movements, like coloring. Sometimes the problem isn’t with their strength, but with their coordination. You may notice that your child seems clumsier than other kids their age. Possible causes.Most of the time, doctors can’t find a specific cause or diagnosis for delays in motor skills or coordination, but some children have medical issues that cause them or make them worse. They include:  What you can do.For motor delays, your child's doctor may suggest that you encourage your little one to move and be active at home. They may also need: Kids usually get stronger and more coordinated as they grow up. Let the doctor know if your child isn’t meeting some of the following milestones or seems to be losing any motor skills they’ve already learned. By 3 years, kids usually can: By 4 years, kids usually can: By 5 years, kids usually can: These problems can mean children have trouble getting along with adults or other children. Most of the time, the issues show up before kids start school. One common cause of social and emotional delays is calledautism spectrum disorder, or ASD. It can affect how a child expresses themselves, interacts, behaves, and learns. What you can do.Treatment for a social or emotional delay depends on the cause and how much it affects your child’s life. You’ll probably work closely with your child’s doctor and other professionals to find what helps them the most. Medication or special types of behavioral therapy can help if your child has behavior problems from a delay. You can also work with a therapist to learn how to encourage good social and emotional skills at home. The earlier you work on these problems, the more likely your child can catch up to other kids their age. By 3 years, kids usually: By 4 years, kids usually: By 5 years, kids usually: There are a lot of reasons a child may have problems with their ability to think, learn, and remember, called cognitive skills. Causes can include flawed genes, physical problems, environmental factors, premature birth or other issues before they were born, and even accidents. But most of the time, doctors can’t find a specific cause for a cognitive delay. What you can do.The most important thing is to let your child’s doctor know if you think something isn’t right. If the doctor agrees, they’ll recommend a specialist who can figure out what the problem is. Depending on your child’s diagnosis, they might get help from: By 3 years, kids usually: By 4 years, kids usually: By 5 years, kids usually: You know your child better than anyone. Don’t be afraid to let their doctor know as soon as you feel something isn’t right. No matter what kind of developmental delay they might have, early diagnosis and treatment is the best way to make it better. SOURCES: CDC: "Developmental Screening," “Facts About Developmental Disabilities,” "Important Milestones." KidsHealth. “Delayed Speech or Language Development.” Shevell, M. et al.Neurology, March 16, 2007. Gillette Children's Specialty Healthcare: "Identifying Patterns of Developmental Delays Can Help Diagnose Neurodevelopmental Disorders." Nemours Foundation: "Delayed Speech or Language Development." Nemours Foundation: "Your Child's Vision." First Signs: "Red Flags." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Pervasive Developmental Disorders Information Page."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.