If you havemultiple myeloma, there’s a good chance it will come back after successful treatment. When this happens, it’s called recurrent or relapsed. If it doesn’t respond to treatment or comes back within 60 days after your last therapy, it’s known as refractory. You’ll probably have a lot of questions and concerns. It’s important to know that treatment options are available, even if yourcancerreturns. And while you can’t completely avoid a relapse, you may be able to spot certain signs and symptoms earlier, which could lead to better care. Multiple myelomais cancer that grows in yourplasmacells -- special white blood cells that makeantibodies(special proteins) to fight infection. Treatment kills most of the myeloma cells in your body, but a few can still survive. Doctors call the small number of cells that stick around after treatment minimal residual disease (MRD). These cells may eventually grow and divide, which leads to a relapse. Doctors can look for changes in your MRD over time to predict how long your treatment will work. New measurement techniques are available to help spot MRD, but some of them aren’t approved by the FDA yet. Because this condition is rarely curable, nearly all people who have it and live through treatment will have a relapse at some point. It can come back in the same place it started or in other areas of your body. Most people who have it go through cycles ofremission(when doctors can’t spot signs of it on tests) and relapse. Your doctor can help you understand what type you have. There are two types of multiple myeloma relapses, and doctors handle them differently: Your doctor will order tests to check the status of your cancer while you’re in remission. They might include: Abnormal results could mean that the condition has returned. Also, when your disease comes back, the same problems you had when you were first diagnosed might crop up again. Or you might have new problems. Some common symptoms are: There are lots of options if you have a relapse. The most common include: Chemotherapy.Thismedicationkills cancer cells in your body. If your multiple myeloma comes back, you might get a higher dose or a different course of drugs, such as: Your doctor may also try high-dose steroids alone. Stem celltransplant.The high doses of chemo orradiationused to treat a multiple myeloma relapse can kill the stem cells in your bone marrow. To protect them, your doctor removes stem cells, usually from your hip. They’ll use a big needle to pull out the liquid marrow while you’re asleep. The cells are frozen and returned to your body by a vein after your treatment. Targeted therapies.These medications target specific parts of cells that help cancer cells grow, divide, or spread. The following drugs can be given alone or as part of a 3-drug combination treatment for recurrent multiple myeloma include:  About one-fourth of people with relapsed multiple myeloma will go into remission after several cycles of chemo. Those who get targeted therapies or high-dose chemo followed by a stem cell transplant usually have better outcomes. Clinical trial.You might want to consider this if yourcancer comes back. These studies give you the chance to try new treatments that aren’t otherwise available. Supportive care.Your doctor may also offer this to ease your symptoms or manage complications. If you have a relapse, you and your doctor will work together to come up with the best treatment strategy. You might have a lot of questions. Here are some to ask: You can’t prevent a relapse entirely. But you should stay on top of your health and see your doctor often to have follow-up tests. Let them know if you have any unusual symptoms. While you’re in remission, your doctor may give you a low dose of a maintenance therapy drug, such as asteroidor targeted medicine, for an extended period of time. This could keep you in remission longer and ward off a relapse. Although there’s no cure for multiple myeloma, it’s important to know that you can live with it for some time. New treatment options are also in development that may offer a better outlook in the future. SOURCES: Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation: “Prognosis,” “What is Multiple Myeloma?” UNM Comprehensive Cancer Center: “Recurrent Multiple Myeloma.” International Myeloma Foundation: “What is Multiple Myeloma?” “Relapse.” UpToDate: “Treatment of relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma.” Moffitt Cancer Center: “Multiple Myeloma Recurrence,” “Multiple Myeloma Symptoms.” MyelomaUK: “Infopack for relapsed and/or refractory myeloma patients.” Mayo Clinic Proceedings: “Therapy for Relapsed Multiple Myeloma: Guidelines From the Mayo Stratification for Myeloma and Risk-Adapted Therapy.” Blood: “How I treat relapsed myeloma,” “Treatment options for relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma.” American Cancer Society: “Living as a Multiple Myeloma Survivor,” “Questions to Ask About Multiple Myeloma,” “Survival Rates by Stage for Multiple Myeloma,” “Types of Stem Cell Transplants for Cancer Treatment.” Canadian Cancer Society: “Maintenance therapy for multiple myeloma.” Dana-Farber Cancer Institute: “How Does Chemotherapy Work? Including Oral Chemotherapy and Immunotherapy.” Medications, natural treatments, and other things that can help. Here's what to expect. Is this approach right for you? Tips that can help during treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.