If you or your child gets a cut, scrape, or burn, it’s important to clean the wound properly right away to prevent infection. Here’s how to do it in five easy steps. Clean your hands using soap and water or hand sanitizer, then put on disposable gloves, if possible. Do this before you touch your wound or treat someone else’s burn, cut, or scrape. Clean, covered hands help prevent infections. This step applies only if the wound is bleeding. Skip this step for burns. Use a clean cloth or sterile gauze to gently press on the wound until bleeding stops (small cuts and scrapes may not require pressure). Elevate (raise) the affected part, if possible. Ifbloodoozes through the cloth or gauze, leave the covering on the wound. Place another clean piece on top and continue to apply pressure. Seek medical attention right away if: Stitchesare usually needed for cuts longer than ½ inch. If you have a cut on your face that’s ¼ inch or longer, a doctor may close it with surgical glue or sutures. You don’t needhydrogen peroxideor iodine products to thoroughly clean a simple cut or scrape. Just follow these steps: If you have a burn, rinse the area under cool (not cold) water for 10 to 15 minutes. Or, place a cool cloth on the burn for the same length of time. See your doctor if any largeblistersform. Go to the emergency room right away if you have any major burns. Over-the-counter skinantibiotics, likeNeosporinorPolysporin, help keep the skin moist and ward off infection. It’s not always necessary to use these if you have a minor cut or scrape. But applying a thin layer can boost your body’s natural healing process and reduce scarring. Doctors may recommend using a topical antibiotic if you have burnblistersthat break open. Some people are allergic to certain ingredients in these products. Stop using the cream or ointment if arashappears. You don’t need to bandage every boo-boo. If you have a minor scrape or cut, clean it and leave it alone. Otherwise, place a clean, sterile, nonstick bandage on the wound after cleaning it. This helps keep out germs. You can find a variety of bandages and tape at your local drugstore. Paper tape may be less irritating to sensitive skin. Change the bandage at least once a day or when it's wet or dirty. Be extra careful to cover any cuts or wounds on areas that tend to get dirty or germy, like your hands or feet. You also want to bandage any wound that would rub on clothing, such as a cut on yourknee. Always cover large wounds. Don’t pick at any scabs -- they’re part of the healing process. Picking at them can leave a scar. Call your doctor if you notice any of the following symptoms. They could mean the wound is infected: If you have a burn, or a wound that breaks the skin, check with your doctor to see if you need atetanusbooster. SOURCES: Intermountain Healthcare: “Chronic Wounds.” Mayo Clinic: “Cuts and Scrapes: First Aid,” “Burns: First Aid.” Familydoctor.org: “First Aid: Cuts, Scrapes, and Stitches.” Seattle Children’s Hospital: “Skin Injury.” Why do some people bruise more easily? 8 essentials for car or purse. 4 steps for adults. Learn when to call a doctor. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.