It's the most common type ofkidney cancer. Although it’s a serious disease, finding and treating it early makes it more likely that you’ll be cured. No matter when you’re diagnosed, you can do certain things to ease your symptoms and feel better during your treatment. Most people who haverenal cell carcinomaare older, usually between ages 50 and 70. It often starts as just one tumor in akidney, but sometimes it begins as several tumors, or it’s found in bothkidneysat once. You might also hear it called renal cellcancer. Doctors have different ways to treat renal cell carcinoma, and scientists are testing new ones, too. You’ll want to learn as much about your disease as you can and work with your doctor so you can choose the best treatment. Scientists aren’t sure exactly what causes renal cell carcinoma. They know that most kidney cancers start when something goes wrong in the genes in the kidney. No one can say for certain why that happens. Several things can raise your chances of getting the disease, like: Early on, renal cell carcinoma doesn’t usually cause any symptoms. As the disease gets more serious, you might have warning signs like: Your doctor will want to find out more about your symptoms to figure out what’s going on. First, they’ll give you aphysical examand ask you questions like: From there, they’ll do some tests that could include: If the results show that you have renal cell carcinoma, your doctor will find out what stage it’s in, so you can decide on the best treatment options. The stage ofcancerdepends on how large your tumor is and whether thecancerhas spread to other parts of your body. You may have tests to take a closer look inside your chest and belly, like: There are a few different ways doctors can treat renal cell carcinoma. You may need to try several before finding one that works. The best plan for you depends on the stage of your cancer, how healthy you are overall, and any side effects you might have. Your options may include: Many kinds of cancer are treated withradiationorchemotherapy, or sometimes both. These treatments usually don’t work well for renal cell carcinoma. In some cases, your doctor may still prescribe them to ease your symptoms or if other treatments haven’t worked. Talk with them about these options and how they might make you feel. Scientists also are looking for new ways to treat renal cell carcinoma in clinical trials. These trials test new drugs to see if they're safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine that isn't available to everyone. Your doctor can tell you if one of these trials might be a good fit for you. It’s important to treat your disease, but also to make sure you're comfortable. Tell your doctor if you’re feeling any pain. They can give you medicines to ease your symptoms. You can do things during and after your treatment to feel stronger physically and emotionally. Your outlook depends on the stage of your disease. The earlier you find and treat renal cell carcinoma, the better your progress will be. Treatment helps many people fight the cancer, and you have several good options to ease pain and other symptoms. To get more information on renal cell carcinoma, visit the web site of theAmerican Cancer Society. SOURCES: American Cancer Society: "Kidney Cancer (Adult) - Renal Cell Carcinoma." Medscape: "Renal Cell Carcinoma." The Merck Manual: "Renal Cell Carcinoma." National Cancer Institute: "General Information About Renal Cell Cancer;" "Renal Cell Cancer Treatment (PDQ®);" and "Renal Cell Cancer." What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.