Restless legs syndrome(RLS) is anervous systemdisorder that causes an overpowering urge to move your legs. It’s also known as Willis-Ekbom disease. Doctors consider it a sleep disorder because it usually happens or gets worse while you’re at rest. You might have trouble sleeping or sitting for a long time, such as in a theater or a car. It may get worse if you don’t get treatment. Over time, a lack of sleep can cause problems at work or home. Restless legs syndrome affects up to 10% of people in the U.S. Anyone can get it, but it’s more common in women, and middle-aged people are more likely to have severe symptoms. Sometimes, doctors don’t recognize RLS, especially if symptoms are mild or don’t happen often. But once it’s diagnosed, treatment can often stop it. Experts estimate that up to 7% to 10% of people in the U.S. may have restless legs syndrome, also called RLS. About 2% to 3% of them have moderate to severe symptoms that affect their quality of life. Also: People with restless legs syndrome have unusual feelings in their legs (like itching, crawling, pulling, aching, throbbing, or pins and needles) and a powerful urge to move their legs to make the sensations go away. The condition can also happen in other areas like the arms, chest, or head. The feelings usually happen on both sides of the body. They can also happen on only one side, or they might start on one side and then move to the other. RLS symptoms range from mild to unbearable. They might come and go, and the intensity can vary between episodes. They’re generally worse in the evening and at night. Symptoms almost always go away in the early morning, so people who have RLS can often sleep well then. For some people, symptoms may cause severe nightly sleep disruption that can impair their quality of life. Doctors don’t know what causes most cases of restless legs syndrome, but your genes might play a role. Nearly half of the people with RLS also have a family member with the condition. It might also be tied to:  There’s no medical test for RLS. Your doctor might want to talk to your sleep partner about what they’ve noticed. The five basic criteria for a diagnosis of RLS are: Your doctor may use lab tests to rule out other conditions. A neurological exam can check for nerve damage or blood vessel problems. A sleep study called polysomnography can tell them if you have other sleep disorders that might cause RLS. Although there’s no cure for restless legs syndrome itself, treatments can help control it so you can get a good night’s sleep. If another condition is causing your restless legs, such as an iron deficiency, your doctor will treat it. Treatment for RLS itself will target your symptoms. If your RLS is mild or moderate, some small changes to your everyday life might help: getting regular exercise; following a sleep schedule; and avoiding caffeine, alcohol, and tobacco. Other ways to treat RLS without drugs include: Medications help some people. But a drug that eases symptoms in one person may make them worse in another, or a drug that works for a while may stop working. Drugs to treat RLS include: Restless legs syndrome is a lifelong condition that might get worse with age. But some people go into remission and don’t have symptoms for days to years. Keep your doctor updated on how you’re doing. If you start to feel worse, they might suggest lifestyle changes or medications. It can help to talk to other people who know what you’re going through, whether it’s a family member who has RLS or a support group. In some cases, restless legs syndrome can disappear on its own. But this is rare. Instead, for most people, symptoms get worse over time. For people with RLS symptoms caused by a medical condition, treatment of that condition can improve their RLS. You should see a doctor to confirm the diagnosis of RLS and to exclude other conditions that may resemble RLS. The doctor can treat problems linked to RLS, like iron deficiency. If you have RLS, you should also see a doctor if you are: You don't have to wait until one of these things happens. If you just want to feel better, see your doctor. Most people with restless legs syndrome have the "idiopathic" form, meaning there's no known cause. For them, there is no risk of RLS becoming something more serious, likeParkinson's disease. Restless legs syndrome can get worse in people with other medical conditions if they don't get those conditions treated. Experts agree that simply changing your behavior can often help you sleep if you have restless legs syndrome. For people with mild to moderate RLS, these steps can reduce or prevent symptoms: If you have moderate to severe RLS, it's important to find ways to handle any stress you feel from it. Here are a few ways to take control: Low levels of iron may be a factor in some people. Getting more iron from food may help those people. Food sources of iron include lean meat, seafood, nuts, beans, vegetables, and iron-fortified grain products such as breakfast cereals. Your doctor can check your blood iron level and see if it's too low. Even in people who are not anemic and have normal iron levels, iron levels may be involved.  Some research shows that there can be lower iron levels in some brain regions in people with RLS, although their iron level is normal. So doctors may prescribe iron supplements even if a person's iron levels are within a normal range. But too much iron can lead to liver damage and other health problems. Experts estimate that about 80% of people with restless legs syndrome also have periodic limb movement disorder, or PLMD. In PLMD, the arms or legs twitch or jerk during the night. The movements disturb sleep and can cause chronic sleepiness. Many people have periodic limb movement disorder by itself and will never get restless legs syndrome. If you think you may have PLMD, see your doctor. SOURCES: News release, FDA. The University of Washington Neuroscience for Kids: "Restless Legs Syndrome." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Restless Legs Syndrome Fact Sheet," "Restless Legs Syndrome." Restless Legs Syndrome Foundation: "About RLS: Frequently Asked Questions." National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Restless Legs Syndrome.” Cleveland Clinic: “Restless Legs Syndrome," "Periodic Limb Movement Disorder(PLMD) in Adults." American Academy of Sleep Medicine: “Restless Legs Syndrome.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD) and Restless Legs Syndrome (RLS).” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Restless Legs Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: "Restless legs syndrome." Mayo Clinic Q and A: "Restless Legs Syndrome in Children." FamilyDoctor.org: "Restless Leg Syndrome." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "Explore Restless Legs Syndrome" National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Restless Legs Syndrome Information Page." RLS Foundation: "Frequently Asked Questions." Frontiers in Neurology: "Correlates of Nonanemic Iron Deficiency in Restless Legs Syndrome." Mayo Clinic Proceedings: "The Management of Restless Legs Syndrome: An Updated Algorithm." Learn about meds your doctor may recommend. Get quick answers to common questions about the condition. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.