The smaller and more pre-term ababyis at birth, the greater their chance of havingretinopathy of prematurity(ROP), aneyedisorder that can lead tovision loss. But most babies who are born with it get better over time. Many don't need treatment at all. ROP tends to affect premature babies who weigh less than 2 ¾ pounds and are born before the 31stweek ofpregnancy. (A full-term pregnancy lasts 38-42 weeks.) In babies with ROP, abnormalbloodvessels grow on the retina of eacheye. The retina is the layer of tissue that lines the back of theeyeand makes it possible to see. Over time, these blood vessels and the associated scar tissue can cause seriousvisionproblems, such as: Of the 14,000 babies in the U.S. born with ROP each year, 400 to 600 will becomelegally blind. Only an eye doctor can tell if yourbabyhas ROP. All infants who are at risk for it should be screened shortly after birth and again once they go home from the hospital. Sometimes, ROP isn't spotted until a baby is 4 to 6 weeks old. A baby's eyes begin to develop around the 16thweek of pregnancy. If they're born very early, this process is cut short. The blood vessels in their eyes don't have enough time to develop as they should. Instead, they grow where they're not supposed to. Or they can be so fragile that they bleed or leak. An eye doctor will put drops in your infant's eyes to make their pupils larger. This helps the doctor see all the parts of the eye better. It doesn't hurt. If your baby has ROP, the doctor will see where it is in the eye, how severe it is, and what the blood vessels in the eyes look like. Stage 1 is the mildest form of ROP. Babies at this stage or stage 2 often don't need any treatment and will have normal vision. Babies with stage 3 have more blood vessels that are abnormal. These may be large or twisted, which means the retina could start to come loose. At stage 4, the retina is starting to move from its normal place. And at stage 5, the retina has come off, and severe vision problems or even blindness is likely. For many babies, ROP often gets better on its own. But if it's severe and the risk of adetached retinais high, your child'sophthalmologistwill want to start treatment. About 10% of babies screened for ROP will need to be treated. This can involve: If the retina is detached, your child's doctor may need to do a more complex surgery: Surgery often stops the disease from getting worse and preventsvision loss. But as many as 25% of all babies who have surgery for ROP do lose some or all of their vision. Because all children with ROP are at higher risk ofeye problemslater in life, your child should follow up with their eye doctor every year until they're an adult. SOURCES: National Eye Institute: "Facts About Retinopathy of Prematurity," "What is a Comprehensive Dilated Eye Exam?" American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus: "Retinopathy of Prematurity." American Academy of Ophthalmology: "What Is Retinopathy of Prematurity?" Kids' Health/Nemours Foundation: "Surgeries and Procedures: Retinopathy of Prematurity." University of Michigan Kellogg Eye Center: "Retinopathy of Prematurity." Mayo Clinic: "Premature Birth." Mintz-Hittner, H.Retina,June 2008. Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.