If you’ve ever hurt yourankleor had another type of sprain or strain, chances are your doctor recommended rest, ice, compression, and elevation (RICE) as one of your first treatments. The RICE method is a simple self-care technique that helps reduce swelling, ease pain, and speed up healing. You can treat minor injuries with the RICE method at home. You might try it if you have an achyknee, ankle, or wrist after playing sports. If you have pain or swelling that gets worse or doesn’t go away, see a doctor. The RICE method includes the following four steps: Pain is your body’s signal that something is wrong. As soon as you’re hurt, stop your activity, and rest as much as possible for the first 2 days. Don’t try to follow the “no pain, no gain” philosophy. Doing so with certain injuries, like a moderate to severeankle sprain, can make the damage worse and delay your recovery. Doctors say you should avoid puttingweighton the injured area for 24 to 48 hours. Resting also helps prevent further bruising. Ice is a tried-and-true tool for reducing pain and swelling. Apply an ice pack (covered with a light, absorbent towel to help preventfrostbite) for 15-20 minutes every two to three hours during the first 24 to 48 hours after your injury.  Don’t have an ice pack? A bag of frozen peas or corn will work just fine.  This means wrapping the injured area to prevent swelling. Wrap the affected area with an elastic medical bandage (like an ACE bandage). You want it to be snug but not too tight -- if it’s too tight, it’ll interruptbloodflow. If theskinbelow the wrap turns blue or feels cold, numb, or tingly, loosen the bandage. If these symptoms don’t disappear right away, seek immediate medical help. This means raising the sore body part above the level of yourheart. Doing so reduces pain, throbbing, and swelling. It’s not as tricky todoas you might think. For example, if you have an ankle sprain, you can prop your leg up on pillows while sitting on the sofa. The CDC recommends you keep the injured area raised whenever possible, even when you’re not icing it. Your doctor may suggest using nonsteroidal anti-inflammatorymedications(likeibuprofenornaproxen) along with the RICE treatment. These are available over the counter and by prescription. Talk to your doctor about your health history before taking these medications. SOURCES: UPMC HealthBeat: “R.I.C.E. Method for Treating Injuries.” Psychology Today: “Feelings are Facts.” Allina Health: “Compression bandaging.” CDC: “Session 6: Being Active, A Way of Life.” Journal of Athletic Training: “What Is the Evidence for Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation Therapy in the Treatment of Ankle Sprains in Adults?” Why do some people bruise more easily? 8 essentials for car or purse. 4 steps for adults. Learn when to call a doctor. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.