Respiratory syncytial virus(RSV) is a common, and very contagious, virus that infects the respiratory tract of most children before their second birthday. For most babies and young children, the infection causes nothing more than acold. But for a small percentage, infection withRSVcan lead to serious, sometimes life-threatening problems such as pneumonia or bronchiolitis, aninflammationof the small airways of thelungs. RSV infection cancause cold-like symptoms, including acoughandrunny nose, which usually last 1 to 2 weeks. When to see a doctor:Call yourbaby's doctor if you notice any of the following RSV symptoms: If yourbabyis verytired, breathes rapidly, has difficulty in breathing, or has a blue tint to their lips orfingernails, call 911 or go to the ER immediately. Respiratory syncytial virus spreads through the air, like after a cough or a sneeze, and through direct contact like touching. The chance of a severe infection is highest for: To diagnose RSV, your child’s doctor will probably look at their medical history and do a physical exam, including listening to their lungs. Your doctor might do some tests if your child is very sick or in order to rule out other problems. Tests for RSV include: Steps you can take to try to avoid and prevent RSV include: Amedicationcalledpalivizumabmay prevent RSV infections and protect high-risk babies from serious complications of RSV infection. If your baby is at high risk, your doctor may give them a monthly shot of it during peak RSV season. While palivizumab is a short acting monoclonal antibody, there is a long acting monoclonal antibody called nirsevimab that may be approved this year for infants. Also, a vaccine for pregnant people is expected to be presented to the FDA for approval in 2023. Older adults can also be susceptible to RSV and two vaccines should be available later in 2023 for those 60 and older to help them avoid serious illness and hospitalization.  Althoughpalivizumabmay help prevent serious complications of RSV infection, doctors don’t use it to treat RSV. No medication treats the virus itself. So caring for a baby with RSV infection involves treating the symptoms and how it affects your baby’srespiratory system. Most babies and young children can be cared for at home: Babies with more serious cases may need to go to a hospital, where their treatment may include: SOURCES: Children's Hospital of Philadelphia: "Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV)." CDC: "Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection (RSV)." KidsHealth: "About RSV." March of Dimes: "RSV." American Lung Association: “RSV.” Mayo Clinic: “Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).” You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.