Your salivary glands make as much as a quart ofsalivaeach day.Salivais important to lubricate yourmouth, help with swallowing, protect yourteethagainst bacteria, and aid in the digestion of food. The three major pairs of salivary glands are: There are also several hundred minor salivary glands throughout themouthand throat. Saliva drains into themouththrough small tubes called ducts. When there is a problem with the salivary glands or ducts, you may have symptoms such assalivary gland swelling,dry mouth,pain,fever, and foul-tasting drainage into the mouth. Many different problems can interfere with the function of the salivary glands or block the ducts so they can't drain saliva. The following are some of the more commonsalivary gland problems: Salivary stones, or sialoliths.The most common cause ofswollen salivary glands, salivary stones are buildups of crystallized saliva deposits. Sometimes salivary stones can block the flow of saliva. When saliva can't exit through the ducts, it backs up into the gland, causing pain and swelling.Painis usually off and on, is felt in one gland, and gets progressively worse. Unless the blockage is cleared, the gland is likely to become infected. Salivary gland infection, or sialadenitis.Bacterial infectionof the salivary gland, most commonly the parotid gland, may result when the duct into the mouth is blocked. Sialadenitis creates a painful lump in the gland, and foul-tasting pus drains into the mouth. Sialadenitis is more common in older adults with salivary stones, but it can also happen in babies during the first few weeks after birth. If not treated, salivary gland infections can cause severe pain,high fevers, andabscess(pus collection). Infections.Viral infections such asmumps,flu, and others can cause swelling of the salivary glands. Swelling happens in parotid glands on both sides of the face, giving the appearance of "chipmunk cheeks." Salivary gland swelling is commonly associated withmumps, happening in about 30% to 40% ofmumpsinfections. It usually begins approximately 48 hours after the start of other symptoms such as fever andheadache. Other viral illnesses that cause salivary gland swelling include the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV),Coxsackievirus, and the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Bacterial infectionsgenerally cause one-sided salivary gland swelling. Other symptoms such as fever and pain will accompany the swelling. The bacteria are typically those found normally in the mouth, as well asstaphbacteria. These infections most often affect the parotid gland.Dehydrationand malnutrition raise the risk of getting a bacterial infection. Cysts.Cystscan develop in the salivary glands if injuries, infections, tumors, or salivary stones block the flow of saliva. Some babies are born with cysts in the parotid gland due to a problem with the development of theears. It can appear as ablisteror soft, raised area. Cysts may interfere with eating and speaking. Tumors.Several different types of tumors can affect the salivary glands. They can be cancerous (malignant) or noncancerous (benign). The two most common tumors are pleomorphic adenomas and Warthin's tumor. Pleomorphic adenomas most commonly affect the parotid glands, but can also affect the submandibular gland and minor salivary glands. The tumor is usually painless and grows slowly. Pleomorphic adenomas are benign (noncancerous) and are more common in women than men. Warthin's tumor is also benign and affects the parotid gland. Warthin's tumor can grow on both sides of the face and affects more men than women. While most salivary gland tumors are benign, some can be cancerous. Malignant tumors include mucoepidermoidcarcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma,adenocarcinoma, low-grade polymorphous adenocarcinoma, and malignant mixed tumor. Sjögren's syndrome.This is a chronicautoimmune diseasein which cells of a person'simmune systemattack the salivary and other moisture-producing glands, leading todry mouthandeyes. About half of people withSjögren's syndromealso have enlargement of the salivary glands on both sides of the mouth, which is usually painless. Treatment for salivary gland problems depends on the cause. For stones and other blockages of the ducts, treatment often begins with measures such as manual removal of stones, warm compresses, or sour candies to increase the flow of saliva. If simple measures don't relieve the problem, surgery may be required to remove the blockage and/or the affected gland. Surgery is usually required to remove benign and malignant tumors. Somebenign tumorsare treated withradiationto keep them from coming back. Some cancerous tumors requireradiationandchemotherapy. Surgery may also be needed to treat large cysts. Other problems may be treated withmedications. For example, bacterial infections are treated withantibiotics.Medicationscan also be prescribed for dry mouth. SOURCES: Medical University of South Carolina: "Sialendoscopy: A Minimally-Invasive Option for Salivary Gland Stones and Blockage." Cedars-Sinai Medical Center: "Salivary Gland Disease and Tumors." The University of Dental Branch at Houston: "DENF 4801 Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery IV Advanced Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Monograph." University of California, San Francisco, department of medicine: "Parotitis." Sjögren's Syndrome Foundation: "What is Sjögren's Syndrome?" Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.