Asarcomais a rare kind ofcancer. Sarcomas are different from the much more commoncarcinomasbecause they happen in a different kind of tissue. Sarcomas grow in connective tissue -- cells that connect or support other kinds of tissue in your body. These tumors are most common in the bones, muscles, tendons, cartilage, nerves, fat, andbloodvessels of your arms and legs, but they can also happen in other areas of your body.. Although there are more than 50 types of sarcoma, they can be grouped into two main kinds: soft tissue sarcoma and bone sarcoma, orosteosarcoma. About 13,190 cases of soft tissue sarcoma and 800-900 new cases of bone sarcomas will be diagnosed in the U.S. in 2022. Sarcomas can be treated, often by having surgery to remove the tumor. We don't yet know what causes sarcoma, but we do know some things that raise the risk of developing one:  Soft tissue sarcomas are hard to spot, because they can grow anywhere in your body. Most often, the first sign is a painless lump. As the lump gets bigger, it might press against nerves or muscles and make you uncomfortable or give youtrouble breathing, or both. There are no tests that can find these tumors before they cause symptoms that you notice. Osteosarcoma can show obvious early symptoms, including: Children and young adults get osteosarcoma more often than adults. And because healthy,active childrenand teens often have pain and swelling in their arms and legs, osteosarcoma might be mistaken forgrowing painsor a sports injury. If your child's pain doesn't get better, gets worse at night, and is in one arm or leg rather than both, talk to a doctor. Adults who have this kind of pain should see a doctor right away. If your doctor thinks you may have a sarcoma, you'll probably need a full exam and tests, including: How your sarcoma is treated depends on what type you have, where in your body it is, how developed it is, and whether or not it has spread to other parts of your body, or metastasized. Surgerytakes the tumor out of your body. In most cases of osteosarcoma, the doctor can remove just thecancercells, and you won't need your arm or leg removed, too. Radiationcan shrink the tumor before surgery or killcancercells that are left after surgery. It could be the main treatment, if surgery isn't an option. Chemotherapydrugs can also be used with or instead of surgery.Chemois often the first treatment when the cancer has spread. Targeted therapiesare newer treatments that use drugs or manmade versions of antibodies from the immune system to block the growth of cancer cells while leaving normal cells undamaged. Most people diagnosed with a soft tissue sarcoma are cured by surgery alone, if the tumor is low-grade; that means it is not likely to spread to other parts of the body. More aggressive sarcomas are harder to treat successfully. The survival rate for osteosarcoma is between 60% and 75% if the cancer has not spread outside the area it started. It is more likely to be cured if all of the cancer can be removed by surgery. SOURCES: University of Michigan Comprehensive Cancer Center: "Sarcoma Overview." Emory University: "What is Sarcoma Cancer?" National Cancer Institute: "Cancer Classification;" "General Information About Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma;" and "Adult Soft Tissue Sarcoma Treatment (PDQ), Health Professional Version." "Sarcoma - Adult Soft Tissue Cancer," American Cancer Society, 2012. Penn Medicine: "What causes sarcoma?" Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center: "About Soft Tissue Sarcoma." American Cancer Society: "Osteosarcoma." American Society of Clinical Oncology. What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.