Seborrheic dermatitisis a commonskindisease that causes an itchyrashwith flaky scales. It causes redness on light skin and light patches on darker skin. It’s also calleddandruff, cradle cap, seborrhea, seborrheiceczema, and seborrheicpsoriasis. It might look similar to psoriasis, eczema, or anallergic reaction. It usually happens on your scalp, but you can get it anywhere on your body. Experts don't know what exactly causes seborrheic dermatitis. It seems to be a mix of things, including: It doesn't come from anallergyor from being unclean. Newborns and adults ages 30 to 60 are more likely to get seborrheic dermatitis. It's more common in men than women and in people with oily skin. These conditions can also raise adults’ risk:  Babies 3 months and younger often get cradle cap: crusty yellow or brown scales on their scalp. It usually goes away before they're a year old, although it can come back when they reachpuberty. Parents might mistake seborrheic dermatitis fordiaper rash. Adults might get seborrheicdermatitison their face, especially around their nose, in their eyebrows, on their eyelids, or behind theirears. It can show up on other parts of your body, too: Your skin mightitchor burn. The scales that flake off could be white or yellowish and look moist or oily. Becauseseborrheic dermatitiscan look like other skin conditions, see your doctor to get a diagnosis and a treatment plan. Your doctor will ask about your medical history and look at your skin. They might scrape off a bit of skin and look at it under a microscope to rule out conditions that affect your skin including: Seborrheic dermatitis will sometimes clear up by itself. But often, it's a lifelong issue that clears and flares. You can usually control it with good skin care. Talk with your doctor about a treatment plan. They’ll probably tell you to start with over-the-counter medicines and home remedies. If you have seborrheic dermatitis on your scalp, use an over-the-counter dandruff shampoo with one of these ingredients: If yourbabyhas cradle cap, shampoo their scalp daily with warm water andbabyshampoo. A dandruff shampoo could irritate their skin, so talk to yourpediatricianabout medicated shampoos before you try one. To soften thick patches, rubmineral oilonto the area and brush gently with a baby hairbrush to help peel the scales off. If you have seborrheic dermatitis on your face and body, keep the affected areas clean. Wash with soap and water every day. Sunlight may stop the growth of the yeast organisms that are causing the problem, so being outdoors could help make the rash go away. Make sure to wearsunscreen. Other treatments include: These medicines can have side effects, especially if you use them for a long time. Follow your doctor’s advice. The best results often come from a mix of treatments. See your doctor if your seborrheic dermatitis doesn't get better, if the area becomes painful, red, or swollen, or if it starts to drain pus. They might give you prescription cream, shampoo, or antifungal pills to clear up the symptoms. SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians: "Seborrhea: What It is and How to Treat It." American Academy of Dermatology: "Seborrheic dermatitis." Cleveland Clinic: "Seborrheic Dermatitis." HealthyChildren.org: "Cradle Cap & Seborrheic Dermatitis." UpToDate: "Cradle cap and seborrheic dermatitis in infants," “Seborrheic dermatitis in adolescents and adults.” Mayo Clinic: “Seborrheic dermatitis.” Journal of Clinical and Investigative Dermatology: “Seborrheic Dermatitis and Dandruff: A Comprehensive Review.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.