Severe hearing lossmeans you can hear some sounds, but very poorly. You may not be able to hear someone speaking, even if they are using a normal voice. You may be able to hear only very loud sounds. Hearing losscan happen in many different ways to people of all ages. It’s different for everyone. The key is to work with your health care team to find ways to help you make the most of the hearing you have. There are many treatments that can help you or your child enjoy life. Babies can be born withsevere hearing loss, and children and adults can get it at any point in their lives. It can happen suddenly or over many years, in one or both ears, and be brief or long-lasting. To understand how hearing loss happens, it helps to know how your ear works. Noise travels through the air as sound waves, which vibrate your eardrum and move three tiny bones inside your ear. That causes waves in the fluid that fills your inner ear. Those waves bend tinyhaircells, which are attached to nerves. They pass electrical signals to the main hearing nerve, called the auditory nerve, which leads to thebrain. Your DNA has many genes that help build the structures involved in hearing. A problem with any of them can mean a baby is born without this sense. Over half of babies born with severe hearing loss, it’s because of a faulty gene. About 20% of babies born with it also have another genetic condition, like Down syndrome. Babies also can lose their hearing because of a problem in the womb. Pregnant women who take certain medicines, such as thecancerdrugthalidomideor drugs fortuberculosis, may have a baby with severe hearing loss. It can also happen if a woman has certain infections, like cytomegalovirus. You also may lose your hearing as you get older. It can happen because of: If your child has trouble hearing, you’ll probably notice it by the way they behave. Some signs include: If hearing loss is affecting you, you may notice that you have a hard time interacting with others because you can’t hear them. Signs include: It’s important to diagnose severe hearing loss as early as possible, especially for children. In some states, laws require medical staff to screen newborns for hearing before they leave the hospital. If your baby doesn’t get a test, ask hospital staff where you can get one. There are two types of newbornhearing tests: If your child shows any symptoms of severe hearing loss as they get older, talk to your pediatrician. If you have trouble hearing, you can talk to your doctor. Testing is usually about the same for children and adults. Your doctor may refer you to a hearing specialist called an otolaryngologist or otologist. They’ll ask about your medical history and do aphysical examof your ears. They may ask you: For a child with hearing problems, the doctor may ask you: The doctor may tell you to see an audiologist, a professional trained in treating hearing problems. They can measure how much hearing you or your child has lost using different tests. For a child with hearing loss, the audiologist may want to see how well they respond to instructions. They may tell them how to play a game to see how they understand speech. They may ask them to look at the sources of sounds. If you have severe hearing loss, you’ll want to ask your doctor questions about your condition, like: If your child has severe hearing loss, you’ll also want to ask:  Treatment for severe hearing loss usually means using different technology to improve the hearing you have. There’s no single therapy that’s best for every person with the condition. Your doctor will recommend one based on how much hearing you’ve lost, how healthy you are, your lifestyle, and how your ears were damaged. Your treatment options include: Hearing aids.They make low sounds louder or easier to hear. Some may help cut background noise. Some hearing aids fit inside the ears. They can be so small that other people may not notice them. Others have clips that fit over the top of the ears to hold them steady. You can take them out when it’s time to sleep, swim, or shower. Extended-wear hearing aids are made of soft material. An audiologist will place them in your or your child’s ears, and they can stay there for months. People who are active may wear them while playing sports. Additional reading:Can a deaf person hear with a hearing aid? Implants.Middle ear implants are devices that vibrate inside your ear. Your doctor will place them there for you. You can use them for long periods of time. Cochlear implants help people who have such severe hearing loss that hearing aids don’t help. They trigger the nerves inside the ears. They don’t cure hearing loss, but they can give children and adults the sensation of sound and improved word/speech recognition. In the hospital, a surgeon places the cochlear implant inside the cochlear that sends a signal to the cochlear nerve and is stimulated via a magnet under the skin. About 4 weeks later, you’ll see the audiologist again to get the outside parts of the implant, including a microphone, a transmitter, and a small computer called a speech processor. These parts send signals to the device in your ear to translate the sounds around you. You can wear them behind your ear like a hearing aid. It can take a long time after the surgery to get cochlear implants to work best for you or your child. You’ll need support from hearing specialists and language therapists to learn how to use the device and respond to the sounds you can hear. The process takes a lot of time and effort. Your doctor will help you decide if you or your child are a good fit for this therapy. It can be hard to lose your hearing, whether suddenly or over many years. If your child has severe hearing loss, you may worry about the parts of life that they’ll miss. Remember that there are many things that can help people of all ages with the condition enjoy life. As you work with your doctor to pick a treatment plan, you can take steps to make life easier for you or your child. For your child: For yourself: It may help to talk to a therapist or counselor to deal with any worry or sadness you or your child may feel. Also, support groups of other families dealing with severe hearing loss are great places to get advice and understanding. Severe hearing loss is different for everyone. It may affect you or your child for many years. But it doesn’t have to keep you from enjoying life. You should be able to live independently, go to school or college, and have a career with severe hearing loss. Work with yourhealth careteam to find treatments and strategies that work for you. It’s important to diagnose and treat severe hearing loss as soon as possible. The sooner you or your child can begin therapy, the better you’ll be able to adapt. Connect with others who are living with severe hearing loss or get helpful information from patient groups like theHearing Loss Association of America. SOURCES: CDC: “Types of Hearing Loss” and “Hearing Loss in Children: Data and Statistics.” American Speech-Language Hearing Association: “Hearing Aids, Cochlear Implants and Assistive Technology;” “Audiologic Rehabilitation;” “FM Systems;” "Untreated Hearing Loss in Adults; "Tests of the Middle Ear;" and "Degree of Hearing Loss." Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on Hearing Enhancement: “Dr. Ross on Hearing Loss: Understanding and Managing a Severe Hearing Loss.” Merck Manuals: “Evaluation of Hearing Loss” and “Drug-Induced Ototoxicity.” Hearing Loss Association of America: “Symptoms of Hearing Loss;” “Diagnosing Hearing Loss;” and "Living With Hearing Loss.” First Signs Organization: “Audiological Screening.” American Hearing Research Foundation: "Congenital Deafness."  © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.