Sexually transmitted diseases, commonly called STDs, are diseases that are spread by havingsexwith someone who has an STD. You can get a sexually transmitted disease from sexual activity that involves themouth,anus,vagina, orpenis. According to the American Social Health Association, 1 out of 4teensin the United States become infected with an STD each year. By the age of 25, half of all sexually active young adults will get an STD. STDs are serious illnesses that require treatment. Some STDs, likeHIV, can't be cured and are deadly. By learning more, you can find out ways to protect yourself from the following STDs. Three things cause sexually transmitted diseases: If you're sexually active, there's a chance that you can catch an STD. That chance can go up if you: Sometimes there are no symptoms of STDs. If you have symptoms, they may include one or more of the following: Your doctor can examine you and do tests to find out if you have an STD. If you have symptoms, you may getblood,urine, or fluid tests to figure out why you have them. If you don't have symptoms, your doctor might order different screening tests, depending on your age and health. You may have ones for: Treatment can: Many STDs are treated withantibiotics. If you are given an antibiotic to treat an STD, it's important that you take all of the drug, even if the symptoms go away. Also, never take someone else's medicine to treat your illness. By doing so, you may make it more difficult to diagnose and treat the infection. Likewise, you should not share your medicine with others. Some doctors, however, may provide additional antibiotics to be given to your partner so that both of you can be treated at the same time. STDs are preventable. There are several things that can protect yourself from them. Use a latexcondomevery time you have sex.(If you use a lubricant, make sure it is water-based.) Make sure to: Limit your number of sexual partners.The more you have, the more likely you are to catch an STD. Choose your sex partners with care.Don't have sex with someone whom you suspect may have an STD. And keep in mind that you can't always tell by looking if your partner has an STD. Talk with your partners about STDs and how to be safe before you have sex. Get checked for STDs.Don't risk giving the infection to someone else. Don't use alcohol ordrugsbefore you have sex.You may be less likely to use a condom if you are drunk or high. Know the symptoms of STDs.Look for them in yourself and your sex partners. Learn about STDs.The more you know, the better you can protect yourself. Get vaccinated.TheHPV vaccineis safe and effective. It can also help prevent genital warts and some forms ofcancer. Everyone through the age of 26 should get it. Not having sex or sexual relations (abstinence) is the only sure way to prevent STDs. SOURCES:American Social Health Association. American Sexual Health Association: "Molluscum: Fast Facts." CDC: "Trichomoniasis - CDC Fact Sheet," "The Lowdown on How to Prevent Sexually Transmitted Diseases." Mayo Clinic: "Epididymitis." See pictures and get the facts. 13 things that can kill your sex drive. How to stop them from spreading. What are the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.