Shaken baby syndrome is a serious brain injury that happens to a baby or young child when it’s shaken with force. The impact kills the baby’s brain cells and keeps oxygen from getting to their brain. Shakenbabysyndrome is a form ofchild abuse. When ababyis shaken hard by the shoulders, arms, or legs, it can causelearning disabilities, behavior disorders,visionproblems or blindness, hearing and speech issues,seizures,cerebral palsy, seriousbraininjury, and permanent disability. In some cases, it can be fatal. Shakenbabysyndrome is different from gently tossing a baby playfully into the air or bouncing a baby on yourknee. Though their brains and necks are fragile, babies are also unlikely to get shaken injuries by falling off furniture or making sudden stops in a car. Being shaken affects babies in many different ways. Symptoms include: You may notice bruises on the arms or chest in the places the baby has been grabbed. Other physical signs include: Babies with shaken baby syndrome may also have symptoms you can't see, such as: In mild cases, behavior, health, or learning issues show up later on. It takes infants a while to hold their heads up. That’s because their neck muscles start out weak and get stronger as they grow. The same goes for their brains, which still need time to develop. When ababyis shaken, itsbraincan bounce between the front and back of its skull. This causes it to bleed,bruise, and swell. It only takes a few seconds of aggressive shaking for this to happen. Risk factors that lead to shaken baby syndrome Babies bring a lot of joy, but there can also be moments of frustration if you feel like you can’t console their crying. Most caregivers handle those times just fine. But if those feelings boil over, it can cross a line. Certain things can increase your risk of crossing that line, including: Because shaken baby syndrome can affect so many different parts of a child's health, there may be more than one doctor or specialist involved in the diagnosis. Depending on the child's level of injury, the tests may be done in doctor's offices or a pediatric intensive care unit. To check thebrain, doctors may use aCT scanto look for injuries that need immediate attention. MRI scans also show doctors detailed areas of thebrain. X-rays of other body parts, like the arms, legs,spine, and skull, showfracturesand whether they were created by force or accident or a full body scan in babies known as a "skeletal survey." To check foreyeinjuries and bleeding, an eye specialist may do aneye exam. Some disorders can mimic the symptoms of shaken baby syndrome. To rule those out, doctors may orderbloodtests. Treatment for shaken baby syndrome depends on the injury. Surgery may be needed in an emergency. Some children will need care for the rest of their lives. Shaken baby syndrome is 100% preventable. It starts with making sure all the baby's caregivers -- parents, grandparents,baby sitters, nannies, etc. -- understand two things: Sometimes you can stop the crying by rubbing the baby's back, singing, using “white noise” from an app or the sound of running water, taking a walk, or using apacifier. Sometimes nothing seems to work. That’s when you especially need to manage your feelings. Have a plan in place. If you feel pushed beyond your limit, put the baby on their back in a safe place -- or inside your home in acar seatwith the baby strapped in on the floor (never leave your little one alone in the car!) -- and step away for a moment. Call someone you trust -- even your neighbor -- who'll listen to your frustrations. As you talk, check on the baby every 5 or 10 minutes. You could also ask someone to watch your baby for half an hour while you take a walk and collect yourself. If you notice your caregiver or another parent struggling, be supportive and suggest a safe place they can take the baby when they need a break. Like babies, sometimes parents and caregivers just need to cry and be comforted. If you suspect someone of shaking a baby, call your local police or the Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline at 800-4-A-Child (800-422-4453). Forcibly shaking a baby, even briefly, can cause permanent brain damage. The results can be serious and long-lasting, and include: Most of these complications require lifelong care. SOURCES: CDC: "A Journalist's Guide to Shaken Baby Syndrome: A Preventable Tragedy." Mayo Clinic: "Shaken baby syndrome." National Center on Shaken Baby Syndrome: "Learn More." Childhelp: "Childhelp National Child Abuse Hotline."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.