Your bowels are made up of two parts -- the large intestine, also called thecolon, and the small intestine.Short bowel syndromeusually affects people who’ve had a lot of their small intestine removed. Without this part, your body can’t get enough nutrients and water from the food you eat. This causes bowel troubles, likediarrhea, which can be dangerous if you go without treatment. If you learn you have short bowel syndrome, know that doctors can do a lot of things to ease your symptoms and make sure you get the right nutrition. People who have the disease can lead active lives. Over time, your body may adjust to having a shorter small intestine, and you may be able to take fewer medicines. The key is to stick to your treatment plan and get the support you need. Adults usually have about 20 feet of small intestine. Those with short bowel syndrome usually have at least half of their small intestine missing or removed. There are a lot of reasons why this might happen. Some babies are born with bowel problems that damage parts of the intestine.Others are just born with shorter bowels. Most often, short bowel syndrome happens after surgery to remove a large part of the small intestine. Doctors may remove the small intestine as part of a treatment for: The main symptom of short bowel syndrome is diarrhea that doesn't go away. You or your child may also have: Since your body has trouble gettingnutrientsandvitaminsfrom food, it can also cause: If you’re having any symptoms and you’ve had a lot of your small intestine removed, your doctor may already suspect short bowel syndrome. To be sure, they’ll do aphysical examand may run other tests, including: Along with the tests, your doctor will probably also ask you questions about your symptoms, like: If your child has short bowel syndrome, ask your doctor how you can make sure they are getting thenutritionthey need to grow. Treatment has two goals: to ease symptoms and give you enoughvitaminsand minerals. The kind of treatment you get depends on how severe your condition is. Your doctor may suggest surgery, including a transplant of part or all of your small intestine. A new organ can cure small bowel syndrome, but a transplant is major surgery.Doctors usually recommend it only when other treatments haven’t worked. If you choose this option, your doctor will put you on a waiting list for a small intestine from a donor. After your transplant, you could be in the hospital for 6 weeks or longer. You'll need to take drugs that prevent your body from rejecting your new organ. You’ll need the medicine and regular check-ups for the rest of your life. Depending on your condition, there are other treatments that may help your small intestine absorb more nutrients and water. They include: Antidiarrheals likeloperamide(Imodium) may help, as well as antibiotics, if there is evidence of bacterial overgrowth in the intestine. It’s very important to make sure children with short bowel syndrome get enough calories and nutrients, since they are still growing. Talk to a doctor or a dietitian about what kinds of food are best. Your child’s doctor will check them regularly to make sure they are getting what they need. Some people may need treatment for only a short time. They get what doctors call intestinal adaptation, when the small intestine is able to adjust to its shorter length and work as it should. It can take up to 2 years for that to happen, and most people still need treatment before their organ gets used to things. Scientists are looking for new treatments for short bowel syndrome inclinical trials. These trials test new drugs to see if they're safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine that isn't available to everyone. Your doctor can tell you if one of these trials might be a good fit for you. It’s hard to deal with symptoms like diarrhea, but short bowel syndrome doesn’t have to take over your life. It's important that you keep in touch with your doctor and follow your treatment plan so you can keep things in control. You can also take steps to feel better, like: By working closely with your doctor, you can keep your symptoms under control and lead an active life. Short bowel syndrome can be very serious if you don't follow your treatment plan. You can become dehydrated, and there's a chance your body won't get enough nutrients. For some people, the condition gets better, and they don’t need a lot of treatment after a while. Whether your short bowel syndrome goes away depends on your age, how healthy you are, how much of your small and large intestines remain, and whether you have another condition like Crohn’s disease. For more information on Short Bowel Syndrome, visit the website ofThe Short Bowel Syndrome Foundation. You can find out about support groups there, too. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: "Short Bowel Syndrome Overview." Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America: "Short Bowel Syndrome and Crohn's Disease." International Foundation for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders: "Short Bowel Syndrome," "Treatments of Short Bowel Syndrome." Medscape: "Short-Bowel Syndrome." National Digestive Diseases Information Clearinghouse: "Short Bowel Syndrome." Short Bowel Syndrome Foundation: "About Short Bowel Syndrome." Foods to avoid. Get personalized tips. Is it genetics, your immune system, or something else? Learn about Crohn’s, colitis, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.