At some point in your life, you’ll accidentally drop something into the sink. If it’s small and of little value, like a grape, it may not be an issue. You let the water run and flush it through. But if your kid slips a big piece of Lego down the drain, you’re going to have some bigger problems when it gets stuck in your pipes. That’s kind of like what happens during asickle cell crisis. Redblood cellsare usually round and have some give to them -- their shape lets them move easily throughout your body. But when you havesickle cell disease(SCD), some cells are curved -- like a sickle--and hard. Because they aren't as flexible--or deformable- they can get stuck in smallbloodvessels. This can happen in lots of organs like your chest, belly and joints. That's when you have.... More than 50% of people with SSD, experience acute chest syndrome because of the small vessels in the lungs. This can lead to acute hypoxia (low oxygen levels) as well as long term complications in the lungs.That’s when you have a sickle cell crisis. The stuck cells slow or even totally block blood flow, so some parts of your body don’t get the oxygen they need. That can cause intense pain that lasts anywhere from a few hours to a few weeks. But you can take steps to lower your chances of a crisis. And even when one comes on, you may be able to care for yourself at home. The most common sign is pain that might be dull, stabbing, throbbing, or sharp, and seems to come out of nowhere. How severe it is and how long it lasts varies with different people and different crises. Some people have crises here and there, while others may have them every month. You might feel the pain anywhere in your body and in more than one place, but it’s often in your: You may also have: Typically, you won’t know why you had a crisis, and there may be more than one cause. Possible triggers include: Thetr are a few drugs that can help.  The drug calledL-glutamineoral powder (Endari) has proven to help prevent these crises from occurring and thus preventing hospitalizations.Hydroxyurea(Droxia,Hydrea,Silkos) and voxelotor (Oxbryta) prevent abnormal red blood cells from forming. This reduces the number of painful crises from sickling blood cells.Crizanlizumab-tmca(Adakveo) helps stop the blood cells from sticking together and blocking small blood cells, which can not just be painful, but can damage organs. Your doctor can help you come up with a plan for how to handle a crisis. If you need to go to the hospital for treatment, make sure to take your plan with you. Often, you can treat the pain at home. When a crisis first starts, your doctor will likely suggest you drink plenty of liquids and take an over-the-counter pain medicine, such asibuprofenoracetaminophen. Talk to your doctor to see what’s safe for you. For example, if you have akidneyproblem, acetaminophen might be the better choice. For more severe pain, your doctor may give you a stronger medicine. You can also try a heating pad, hot bath, or amassage.Physical therapymay provide some relief, too. And don’t forget to tend to your mind.Counseling, relaxation methods likemeditation, and seeking support from family and friends are key steps in keeping yourself well. If you can’t manage the pain at home, go to an emergency room, where they can give you stronger pain medicine. You may need to stay in the hospital until the pain is under control. There’s no sure way, but you can lower your odds: It also helps to keep yourself as healthy as possible: SOURCES: FamilyDoctor.org: “Sickle Cell Disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Sickle Cell Anemia.” American Family Physician: “Practical Tips for Preventing a Sickle Cell Crisis.” KidsHealth: “What Is a Sickle Cell Crisis?” National Institutes of Health: “What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Sickle Cell Disease?,” “How Is Sickle Cell Disease Treated?” National Health Service (U.K.): “Sickle Cell Disease.” CDC: “Sickle Cell Disease.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.