The thought oflicemight give you the creepy crawlies -- and with good reason. When these tiny mites infect the scalp andskin, they trigger intenseitchingand may even create a rash around the hairline. There are different types oflice. The type you have depends on the part of your body that’s affected:  This article will focus on head lice, a very common condition among kids in elementary and middle school. About 6 million to 12 million of them get it every year. Head lice are most active at night. They can cause such intense itching that your child could losesleepover it. It’s uncomfortable, but lice won’t make you sick. They don’t spread disease and they’re not a sign that you’re dirty. You can get lice even if you shower regularly and have super-cleanhair. These pesky creatures don’t fly or jump -- they crawl over to the closest head they can find. This is called head-to-head contact, and most people get lice this way. But they also can spread onto hats, helmets, combs, bedding, pillows – even earbuds. Young children may get or spread lice when crawling on rugs. It’s important to know the early signs of lice. Then you can take steps to keep your child comfortable and keep the mites from spreading throughout your home. These pests are a type of insect called aparasite. They need humanbloodto live. Head lice usually stay close to the scalp and behind the ears. You might also spot them on the eyebrows and eyelashes. Female adult lice lay six to eight eggs a day on your scalp, and they spread from there. There are three forms of lice to watch for: If you spot lice, tell your child’s school so they can properly clean classroom items and stop the spread. The CDC says lice aren’t a medical hazard, and most health departments don’t require that you report it. But local school boards make their own school lice policies. Check with your child’s school to find out its policy. Photo Credit (inset): Science Photo Library / Science Source SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology: “Head Lice: Overview,” “Head Lice: Tips for Managing.” CDC: “Frequently Asked Questions,” “Body Lice,” “Parasites-Lice-Head Lice,” Parasites-Lice-Head Lice: Biology.” KidsHealth: “Head Lice.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – Photo Caption Medline Plus / National Library of Medicine – Photo Caption Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.