Snoringis noisybreathingwhile you sleep. It’s a common condition that can affect anyone, although it happens more often in men and in people who areoverweight. Snoring tends to get worse with age. Snoring once in a while isn’t usually a serious problem. It’s mostly a nuisance for your bed partner. But if you’re a long-term snorer, you not only disrupt the sleep patterns of those close to you, you hurt your ownsleepquality. Snoring can itself be a symptom of a health problem likeobstructive sleep apnea. Talk to your doctor if you’re overly sleepy during the day, if you snore often or very loudly, or if your partner notices that you sometimes stop breathing altogether. You might need medical help so you (and your loved ones) can get a good night’ssleep. Snoring happens when the flow of air through yourmouthand nose is blocked. Several things can interfere with air flow, including: Your partner might be the person who tells you that you snore. Your doctor will ask both of you about your symptoms. Your doctor will also ask about your medical history and do aphysical examto look for things that could block your airways, like chronic nasalcongestiondue to rhinitis orsinusitis, a deviated septum, or swollen tonsils. They might also give you some tests: Treatments for snoring include: Try these other solutions to get a good night’s sleep. Snoring doesn’t seem to have complications. Butsleep apneacan cause problems, including:  SOURCES: American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery: "Snoring." National Sleep Foundation: “Snoring and Sleep.” American Sleep Apnea Association: “Is it Snoring or Sleep Apnea?” American Academy of Sleep Medicine: “Snoring.” Mayo Clinic: “Snoring.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Snoring.” MedlinePlus: "Snoring." Sudhansu Chokroverty, MD, professor of neuroscience, Seton Hall University School of Graduate Medical Education, South Orange, NJ; clinical professor of neurology, Robert Wood Johnson University Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ. See the variety of reasons that can causes these dreams. Get tips to help manage daytime sleepiness. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.