Soft tissue sarcomas are a group of cancers that grow in parts of your body such as your muscles, bones, deep layers ofskin, or in fat. They also can form onbloodvessels, nerves, or connective tissues, which support organs and other kinds of tissues. Soft tissue sarcomas are rare. They account for less than 1% of all cases ofcancer. But there are dozens of different types, and they can happen in children and adults. About 13,000 people are diagnosed with one of these cancers every year. Doctors aren’t sure why these types of cancers happen, but some things may raise your chances of having one: A family history of certain diseasesthat you can inherit from your parents. These includeneurofibromatosisandGardner syndrome, which are disorders that make tumors grow in parts of your body. Certain chemicalslike arsenic, vinyl chloride, or dioxin. Radiation, including during treatment for other kinds of cancer. The most common sign of asoft tissue sarcomais a painless lump or growth. But some may not be noticeable until they’re big enough to press on nearby muscles or nerves. About 1 in 5 soft tissue sarcomas happen in the belly. You probably wouldn’t learn that you have one until they caused other problems, such asstomach pain, bleeding, or a blocked intestine. A doctor might find asarcomain yourlungsor chest only after you havechest painortrouble breathing. About 10% of the time, a sarcoma will start on your head or neck. The most common type of soft tissue sarcoma in children, calledrhabdomyosarcoma, happens mostly in those areas. You should see your doctor if: Most visible lumps aren’t sarcoma. They’re usually a harmless cluster of fat cells called a lipoma. But if you have one that’s bigger than 2 inches and growing or causingpain, see your doctor. If your doctor thinks you may have a sarcoma, you’ll probably get: Aphysical examination.Your doctor will look closely at any lumps or bumps. Imaging tests.These might include: Abiopsy.Your doctor will take a sample of the growth to look at under a microscope. Most of the time, this can done with a needle, but in some cases, you might need minor surgery. If the tests show that you havecancer, your doctor will use the results to find out the stage of the cancer. That’s a number I through IV that’s based on how big it is and whether it’s in other parts of your body. You may want to ask:  This will depend on where the cancer is and how far it’s spread, but surgery is usually the first step. Your doctors will try to take out any tumors without harming the healthy tissue around them. They might take out one or more of yourlymph nodesto check if your sarcoma has reached them and spread to other places in your body. If a tumor is in one of your arms or legs, your doctors may try to replace any tissue they have to take out. They might use tissue from another part of your body or artificial implants. In rare cases, your doctors may have to remove a limb. For some people, surgery may be all it takes to get rid of the cancer. But if a sarcoma has spread to other parts of your body, your doctor also may recommendchemotherapy, which uses strongdrugsto attack cancer cells as they grow. You might get these medicines through an IV, or you might take them as pills. If the tumor is too hard to take out completely or you’re too ill to have an operation, doctors might skip surgery and go straight to radiation therapy. This uses high-energy particles or X-rays to kill cancer cells. Your doctor will use what’s known as external beam therapy, where a machine aims that radiation at part of your body. You may get it daily for several weeks. Some institutions do intraoperative radiation therapy, which you get during surgery after the tumor is removed but before the surgeonstitchesyou back up. In other cases, a method called brachytherapy may be an option. Doctors put small radioactive pellets in the part of your body where the tumor is and then take them out a few days later. You may have to stay in the hospital while the pellets are inside. Your doctors also might suggest radiation therapy to shrink a tumor before they try surgery to take it out. Or they might recommend it after the surgery so they can kill any remaining cancer cells. Chemotherapy and radiation can damage normal cells along with the cancerous ones, and that can cause some side effects. Chemotherapy and radiation can causenausea, vomiting, andfatigue. Chemotherapy also can make yourhairfall out and lead to a loss of appetite and sores in your mouth. Radiation also can cause redness, peeling, or blistering on your skin where the beams were aimed. If radiation targets your belly or pelvis, it may causediarrhea. If it’s aimed at your head or chest, it may hurt to swallow. As with any type of cancer, it could come back. Doctors call that “recurrent” soft tissue sarcoma. Your treatment for a recurrence would depend on whether it comes back in the same place or if it shows up in other parts of your body. Just like with the first time, the options might include surgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or brachytherapy. You can ask your doctor if there is aclinical trialfor your type of sarcoma. These test new ways of treating cancer. It takes a team to counter cancer. Before your treatment starts, you’ll meet with doctors, nurses, and technicians who will manage your therapy. They’ll lay out the plan they recommend and tell you about any side effects you might have. After that, you’ll be asked to sign forms saying that your doctors have told you about the procedures and that you’ve agreed to them. Your doctors will tell you if you need to stop certain foods or activities during your treatment. Be sure to tell them about any medications (even those that you can buy “over the counter,” or without a prescription) andsupplements(including vitamins and “natural” products) you take regularly. Your therapy may keep you out of work for a while. Talk with your supervisor about your condition and whether you might need to change your schedule or duties while you get treatment. It’s against the law for your employer to treat you unfairly because of your illness. Finding out that you have soft tissue sarcoma may change some things about your life. Surgery and other types of treatment might change how you feel about yourself and your body. Some also can affect your sex life and your ability to have children. Having cancer can take a toll on you mentally and emotionally, as well as physically. Each person is different, but a lot of people deal with feelings of fear, anger, uncertainty, andstress. These feelings can take a toll on your loved ones as well. If those feelings are hard to handle, talk with your doctors, a counselor, clergy member, or friends. During treatment, try to eat a healthydietand get as much rest as you can. You may feel weak, so ask your doctors about exercises that may help you keep up your energy. Many people know what it’s like to face cancer, and there are a lot of support groups to help you deal with the issues it causes. These groups can help you talk about feelings and concerns you may not want to share with family or friends. They may also be a way to learn more about what to expect and how your life may change. Some groups are led by professionals who guide the discussions, while others are led by people who are going through the same things you are. There also are groups for family members or caregivers. Your doctors, nurses, or a counselor can help you find groups that might help. SOURCES: National Cancer Institute. American Cancer Society. The Mayo Clinic: “Soft Tissue Sarcoma.” Sarcoma Foundation of America: “Patient resources.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Sarcoma.” American Society of Clinical Oncologists. Cancer Research UK: “Living with Soft Tissue Sarcoma.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.