It’s rare for someone to stumble upon a brown recluse spider because these eight-legged creatures are true to their name: They prefer to be left alone. They tend to live in indoor and outdoor spaces where people don’t go most of the time. If you do find yourself in the same place as one, though, it won’t want to attack you -- it’ll want to get out of your way. But if it feels trapped, it may bite you. Brown recluse spiders are one of two spiders found in the United States that can cause real trouble if they bite you. They produce harmful venom that may cause a painful sore at the site of thebite. It may cause even more severe symptoms in some people. If you have a run-in with a brown recluse, it’s wise to have a doctor check you out, just in case. A brown recluse might not be brown, but tan. It has a violin-shaped area on the front half of its body, with the neck of the violin pointing toward the spider’s abdomen. It may be bigger than other spiders that you’re used to seeing. Its body can range in size from a quarter-inch to three-quarters of an inch, and its long legs make it appear even larger. Most spiders have eight eyes, but abrown recluse spiderhas six. Two are in the front, and there are two more on each side of its head. Brown recluses are found mostly in the Midwest or the South. The spider favors indoor spaces, like attics, garages, or dark closets. Outdoors, it hides in out-of-the-way places -- under logs, beneath porches, or within piles of rocks. Brown recluse spider bites often go unnoticed initially because they are usually painless bites. Occasionally, some minor burning that feels like abee stingis noticed at the time of the bite. Symptoms usually develop 2-8 hours after a bite. Keep in mind that most bites cause little tissue destruction. Initially the bite site is mildly red and upon close inspection may revealfang marks. Within a few hours, the redness gives way to pallor with a red ring surrounding the area, or a "bull's-eye" appearance. The lesion will often appear to flow downhill over the course of many hours. The center area will then often blister, which over 12-48 hours can sink, changing color, often turning bluish then black as this area of tissue dies. Within the first day or two after you’ve been bitten, you may notice: Your doctor will want to be as certain as they can that you were, in fact, bitten by a spider. It’ll help if you can describe what the spider looked like. Some people try to catch thebugto show the doctor. That’s fine, as long as you can do it safely. You might just try to take a photo of it. If you suspect your small child was bitten by a brown recluse, see your doctor right away. Their bodies can’t ward off the dangerous effects of the spider’s venom.For adults, most brown recluse spider bites can be treated at home with good results. But about 10% of them cause ulcers or blisters that damage your skin so badly that you need a doctor’s care. If your symptoms are mild, try these simple home remedies: See a doctor right away if you notice any of these symptoms: Some spider bites can have tetanus spores, so you might need atetanus shotafter you’ve been bitten. If you have an infection, you may need antibiotics. SOURCES: U.S. Department of Labor: “Brown Recluse Spider.” CDC: “Venomous Spiders,” “Types of Venomous Spiders.” Mayo Clinic: “Spider Bites Overview,” “Spider Bites Diagnosis,” “Spider Bites Symptoms and Causes,” Spider Bites: Preparing for Your Appointment,” “Spider Bites Treatment.” Nemours Foundation: “Bug Bites and Stings.” University of California: “Brown Recluse and Other Recluse Spiders.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.