Spinal stenosis is a condition, mostly in adults 50 and older, in which your spinal canal starts to narrow. This can cause pain and other problems. Yourspineis made up of a series of connected bones (or vertebrae) and shock-absorbing discs. It protects your spinal cord, a key part of thecentral nervous systemthat connectsyour brainto your body. The cord rests in the canal formed by your vertebrae. There are two different types of spinal stenosis. The type you have depends on where on your spine the condition is. You can have one or both types of spinal stenosis. Lumbar stenosis is the most common. For most people, stenosis results from changes caused byarthritis. As the spinal canal narrows, the open spaces between your vertebrae start to get smaller. The tightness can pinch the spinal cord or the nerves around it, causingpain, tingling, or numbness in your legs, arms, or torso. There’s no cure, but there are a variety of nonsurgical treatments and exercises to keep the pain at bay. Most people with spinal stenosis live normal lives. Spinal stenosis usually affects your neck or lower back. Not everyone has symptoms, but if you do, they tend to be the same: stiffness, numbness, andback pain. More specific symptoms include: If you’re having symptoms, talk them over with your doctor. If you’re having a loss of bladder or bowel control, call your doctor at once. The leading reason for spinal stenosis is arthritis, a condition caused by the breakdown of cartilage -- the cushiony material between your bones -- and the growth of bone tissue. Osteoarthritiscan lead to disc changes, a thickening of the ligaments of the spine, and bone spurs. This can put pressure on your spinal cord and spinal nerves. Other causes include: Some people are born with spinal stenosis or diseases that lead to it. For them, the condition usually starts to cause problems between the ages of 30 and 50. Risks for spinal stenosis vary with age. For example: The doctor will ask questions about your medical history. After that, they might order at least one of the following tests to figure out whether you have the condition: The treatment you need for your spinal stenosis depends on where the stenosis is and how severe your symptoms are. You might need: Medication You might take: Surgery If you have a severe case of spinal stenosis, you might struggle to walk or have issues with your bladder and bowels. Your doctor may recommend a type of surgery to create space between the bones soinflammationcan go down. You might get: Surgery carries its own risks. Talk to your doctor about how much it can help, recovery time, and more before taking that step. Assistive Devices You might get braces, a corset, or a walker to help you move about. Some things you can do to help ease symptoms of spinal stenosis include: Many patients also try nontraditional therapies, includingchiropractic,acupuncture, andmassage therapy. Again, be sure your doctor knows if you’re trying a nontraditional approach. If you don’t treat your spinal stenosis, it can get worse over time. Certain symptoms may even become permanent, including: SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Spinal Stenosis” National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: “What Is Back Pain? Fast Facts: An Easy-to-Read Series of Publications for the Public,” “Questions and Answers about Spinal Stenosis.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Lumbar Spinal Stenosis,” “Spine Basics,” “Effects of Aging,” “About Us.” Neuroscience Online, McGovern Medical School at the University of Texas Health Science Center Houston: “Chapter 3: Anatomy of the Spinal Cord.” American College of Rheumatology: “Spinal Stenosis,” “What is a Rheumatologist?” Mayo Clinic: “Spinal stenosis,” “CT scan.” Arthritis Foundation: “Osteoarthritis.” Weill Cornell Brain and Spine Center: “Spinal Stenosis.” American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation: “What is a Physiatrist?” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Lumbar Spinal Stenosis.” Spine-Health: “Spinal Stenosis Symptoms and Diagnosis.” Medscape: “Spinal Stenosis Medication.” Is a firm mattress best for back pain? Maybe not. Learn about surgery options, possible risks, and recovery. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.