Spinal muscular atrophy(SMA) most often affects babies and children and makes it hard for them to use their muscles. When your child has SMA, there's a breakdown of the nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. Thebrainstops sending messages that control muscle movement. When that happens, your child's muscles get weak and shrink, and children can have trouble controlling head movement, sitting without help, and even walking. In some cases, they can have trouble swallowing andbreathingas the disease gets worse. There are different types of SMA, and how serious it is depends on which type your child has. There's no cure, but treatments can improve some symptoms and, in some cases, help your child live longer. Researchers are working to find new ways to fight the disease. Keep in mind that every child or adult who has SMA will have a different experience. No matter how much your child's movement is limited, the disease doesn't affect their intelligence in any way. They will still be able to make friends and socialize. Symptoms vary a lot, depending on the type of SMA: Type 0.This is the rarest and most severe form of SMA and develops while you’re stillpregnant. Babies with this type of SMA move less in the womb and are born withjointproblems, weak muscle tone, and weak muscles for breathing. They often do not survive due tobreathing problems. Type 1.This is also a severe type of SMA. A child may not be able to support their head or sit without help. They may have floppy arms and legs and problems swallowing. The biggest concern is weakness in the muscles that control breathing. Most children with type 1 SMA don't live past age 2 because of breathing problems. Keep in touch with your medical team, family members, clergy, and others who can help give you the emotional support you need while your child fights this disease. Type 2.This affects children 6-18 months old. The symptoms range from moderate to severe and usually involve the legs more than the arms. Your child may be able to sit and walk or stand with help. Type 2 is also called chronic infantile SMA. Type 3.Symptoms for this type start when children are 2-17 years old. It's the mildest form of the disease. Your child will most likely be able to stand or walk without help but may have problems running, climbing stairs, or getting up from a chair. Later in life, they may need a wheelchair to get around. Type 3 is also called Kugelberg-Welander disease or juvenile SMA. Type 4.This form of SMA starts when you're an adult. You may have symptoms such as muscle weakness,twitching, or breathing problems. Usually, only your upper arms and legs are affected. You'll have the symptoms throughout your life, but you can keep moving and even get better with exercises that you'll practice with the help of a physical therapist. It's important to remember that there's a lot of variation in the way this type of SMA affects people. Many people, for instance, are able to keep working for many years. Ask your doctor about ways to meet with others who have the same condition and know what you're going through. SMA is a disease that's passed down through families. If your child has SMA, it's because they have two copies of a broken gene, one from each parent. When this happens, their body won't be able to make a specific kind of protein. Without it, the cells that control muscles die. If your child gets a faulty gene from just one of you, they won't get SMA but will be a carrier of the disease. When your child grows up, they could pass the broken gene to their own child. SMA can be hard to diagnose because the symptoms may be similar to other conditions. To help figure out what's going on, your doctor may ask you: Your doctor may also order some tests that can help make a diagnosis. For example, they may take abloodsample from your child to check for missing or broken genes that can cause SMA. Your doctor could also order a blood test that checks for creatine kinase (CK). It’s an enzyme that leaks out of weakening muscles. High blood CK levels aren’t always harmful but do show possible muscle damage. Other tests rule out conditions that have similar symptoms: The FDA has approved threemedicationsto treat SMA:nusinersen(Spinraza),onasemnogene abeparvovec-xioi(Zolgensma) andrisdiplam(Evrysdi). Both are forms of gene therapy that affect the genes involved in SMA. The SMN1 and SMN2 genes give your body instructions for making a protein that helps with controlling muscle movement. Besides gene therapy, your doctor may suggest a few other ways to help manage symptoms: There's a lot you can do as a family to help your child with some of the basic tasks of daily life. A team of doctors, therapists, and support groups can help you with your child's care and let them keep up with friendships and activities with your family. Your child will probably need lifelong care from different types of doctors. They may need to see: This team can help you make decisions about your child's health. It's important not to let yourself get overwhelmed by the task of managing care. Check for support groups that can let you share your experiences with others who are in similar situations. The outlook depends on when symptoms started and how severe they are. If your child has type 1, a severe form of SMA, they may start having symptoms anywhere from birth to age 6 months. In general, most babies with this type start showing signs of the disease by age 3 months. You'll start to notice that their development is delayed, and they may not be able to sit up or crawl. Even though children with this type usually don't live beyond age 2, with help from your doctors and support team, you can make their life comfortable. In other types of SMA, doctors can help ease a child’s symptoms for many years and, in many cases, throughout their life. Keep in mind that every child or adult who has SMA will have a different experience. A treatment plan that's made just for your child can help them have a better quality of life. Organizations like these can offer you support: SOURCES: Genetics Home Reference: "Spinal muscular atrophy," "SMN1 gene," "SMN2 gene." KidsHealth: "Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA)." Muscular Dystrophy Association: "Spinal Muscular Atrophy." Medscape: "Spinal Muscular Atrophy." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Spinal Muscular Atrophy Information." Boston Children's Hospital: "Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA)." Jennifer Trust for Spinal Muscular Therapy: "Adult Onset SMA." Cure SMA: "Therapeutic Approaches." New England Journal of Medicine: "Single-Dose Gene-Replacement Therapy for Spinal Muscular Atrophy." Muscular Dystrophy UK: "Developing a genetic therapy for spinal muscular atrophy." Science Advances: "Gene therapy rescues disease phenotype in a spinal muscular atrophy with respiratory distress type 1 (SMARD1) mouse model." Columbia University Department of Neurology: "Q&A on Spinraza Treatment for Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) Patients." FDA: "FDA approves innovative gene therapy to treat pediatric patients with spinal muscular atrophy, a rare disease and leading genetic cause of infant mortality," "FDA approves first drug for spinal muscular atrophy." Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.