Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the second most common form of skin cancer. It’s usually found on areas of the body damaged by UV rays from the sun or tanning beds. Sun-exposedskinincludes the head, neck, chest, upper back, ears, lips, arms, legs, and hands. SCC is a fairly slow-growingskin cancer. Unlike othertypes of skin cancer, it can spread to the tissues, bones, and nearby lymph nodes, where it may become hard to treat. When caught early, it’s easy to treat.   SCC can show up as: Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays, like the ones from the sun or a tanning bed, affects the cells in the middle and outer layers of your skin and can cause them to make too many cells and not die off as they should. This can lead to out-of-control growth of these cells, which can lead to squamous cell carcinoma. Other things can contribute to this kind of overgrowth, too, like conditions that affect yourimmune system.  Certain things make you more likely to develop SCC: Your doctor may refer you to a dermatologist who specializes in skin conditions. They will: If your doctor thinks a bump looks questionable, they’ll remove a sample of the spot (a skinbiopsy) to send to a lab for testing. Squamous cell carcinoma can usually be treated with minor surgery that can be done in a doctor’s office or hospital clinic. Depending on the size and location of the SCC, your doctor may choose different techniques to remove it. For small skin cancers: For larger skin cancers: For cancers that spread beyond your skin  If it’s not treated, squamous cell carcinoma can spread and damage healthy tissue and organs. In rare cases, it can be life-threatening. That can be more likely if: If you’ve been diagnosed withskin cancer, you're more likely to get it again -- so visit your doctor for regular skin checks. There are preventive supplements such as nicotinamide (vitamin B) and Heliocare (polypodium leucotomos fern extract). Photo Credit (insert): Peter Skinner / Science Source SOURCES: American Cancer Society. Duke University Medicine: “Types of skin cancer.” National Cancer Institute. Johns Hopkins Medicine. American Academy of Dermatology. Skincancer.org: "Nicotinamide for Skin Cancer Chemoprevention." Mayo Clinic: “Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Skin.”  Marc R. Avram, Sandy Tsao, Zeina Tannous, Mathew M. Avram Skin Cancer Foundation - Photo Caption American Academy of Dermatology. - Photo Caption Pagination What you need to know. For healthy blood cells. Separate fact from fiction. Symptoms, screening tests, and more. © 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.