Your child's safety is your responsibility. The following tips should help you keep your baby out of harm's way from birth through theirtoddleryears. To minimize the risk that a child will accidentally be left behind in a car or get trapped inside: When your baby becomes mobile, here are important tips to keep your baby safe around your home: SOURCES: Rachel Moon, MD, Children’s National Medical Center, Washington, D.C. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration: "Car Seat Recommendations for Children," "Ease of Use Ratings." National Health Information Center. The Mayo Clinic. FDA: “Should You Put Sunscreen on Infants? Not Usually.” CDC: "Child Passenger Safety: Fact Sheet," "Insect Repellents Help Prevent Malaria and Other Diseases Spread by Mosquitoes," "West Nile Virus Fact Sheet," "Avoid Insect Bites," "Guidelines for DEET Insect Repellent Use," "Protection against Mosquitoes, Ticks, & Other Arthropods," "Picking the Right Pet." Nemours Foundation: "Auto Safety." Safercar.gov: "The Right Fit - Car Seat Installation." FamilyDoctor.org: "Baby's First Steps." Government of Canada: "Injury Data Analysis Leads to Baby Walker Ban." Harvard Medical School: "Parents: Don't Use a Baby Walker." HealthyChildren.org: "Baby Walkers: A Dangerous Choice," "Cats and Toxoplasmosis," "Pets and Pasteurella Infections," "Salmonella Contamination in Dry Dog and Cat Foods," "Prevent Bite Wounds." Iranian Journal of Child Neurology: "The effect of baby walker on child development: A systematic review." National Archives Federal Register: "Safety Standard for Infant Walkers: Final Rule." Pediatrics: "Infant walker-related injuries in the United States," "Injuries associated with infant walkers." U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission. Home Safety Council. American Academy of Pediatrics: "Choosing an Insect Repellent for Your Child," "2015 Summer Safety Tips." Environmental Protection Agency: "DEET." U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. Window Covering Safety Council. National Safe Kids Campaign. Yvonne Maldonado, MD, professor of pediatrics and health research and policy, chief of pediatric infectious diseases, Stanford University School of Medicine. Aaron Glatt, MD, executive vice president and chief administrative officer, Mercy Medical Center; spokesperson, Infectious Diseases Society of America. University of Arizona: "Germ Survey: Summary of Findings." American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals: "Cleaning Dog Toys with Bleach."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.