Stevens-Johnson syndrome, also called SJS, is a rare but serious problem. Most often, it's a severe reaction to a medicine you've taken. It causes yourskintoblisterand peel off. It affects your mucus membranes, too.Blistersalso form inside your body, making it hard to eat, swallow, even pee. Getting treated right away helps protect your skin and other organs from lasting damage. SJS usually starts with a fever and feeling like you have the flu. A few days later, other symptoms appear, including: SJS is dangerous. If you have these symptoms, go to the emergency room. More than 100 drugs can cause SJS. Some of the most common are: The medicines most likely to cause problems in kids are sulfaantibiotics, Tylenol, and drugs that treat seizures, especiallycarbamazepine(Carbatrol,Tegretol). If you're going to get SJS, it will most likely happen in the first 2 months you're taking a drug. An infection, like pneumonia or the herpes virus that causescold sores, can also trigger SJS. This happens more often with kids than adults. You're more likely to get SJS if you have: You'll be treated for SJS in the hospital by a special team of doctors and nurses. Some people are treated in a burn center or intensive care unit. The first thing doctors will do is to stop themedicationor treat the infection that made you sick. They'll also try to relieve your symptoms, prevent infections, and support your healing. Replace fluids andnutrients. Your body needs to stay hydrated, and your skin needs protein to rebuild. You'll probably get fluids from an IV at first, then be fed through a tube that goes into yourstomachthrough your nose. Wound care. Hospital staff will keep your skin clean. They'll gently remove dead skin and cover bare patches with a special dressing. Eyecare.Your care team will clean youreyesand use special drops and creams to keep them from drying out. You could be in the hospital from 2 to 4 weeks. It takes time to recover from SJS, and most people do. Severe cases can be fatal, though, especially during the 3 months after it started. The most common complications tend to besepsis(an inflammatory reaction in your whole body),trouble breathingbecause fluid builds up in yourlungs, or many organs that stop working. Your chances are better if you're young and otherwise healthy, but you're still at greater risk for up to a year. Sometimes SJS has effects that will show up years after you heal, including: There's often no way to know how you'll react to certain medicines -- even ones your doctor prescribes. If you're of Asian descent, you may have a gene that raises your risk of SJS. Talk to your doctor about getting tested for this gene before you take carbamazepine. If you've already had SJS, be careful so you don't get it again. SOURCES: Fritsch, P.American Journal of Clinical Dermatology. November-December 2000. Levi, N.American Journal of Pediatrics. January 2009. Medscape: "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome Treatment & Management." National Organization for Rare Diseases (NORD): "Stevens Johnson Syndrome." Tartarone, A.Therapeutic Drug Monitoring. December 2010. UpToDate: "Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, and diagnosis," "Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis: Management, prognosis, and long-term sequelae." U.S. Food and Drug Administration: "FDA Warns of Rare Acetaminophen Risk." August 2013. U.S. Food and Drug Administration: "Information for Healthcare Professionals: Dangerous or Even Fatal Skin Reactions - Carbamazepine (marketed as Carbatrol, Equetro, Tegretol, and generics)." Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.