Stomach cancerbegins whencancercells form in the inner lining of yourstomach. These cells can grow into a tumor. Also called gastric cancer, the disease usually grows slowly over many years. Stomach cancer is most often seen in people in their late 60s through 80s. Almost all stomach cancers (about 95%) start in the glandular tissue that lines the stomach. The tumor may spread along the stomach wall or may grow directly through the wall and shed cells into the bloodstream or lymphatic system. Once beyond the stomach,cancercan spread to other organs. Stomach cancers are classified according to the type of tissue they start in. If you know the symptoms of stomach cancer, you and your doctor may be able to spot it early, when it’s easiest to treat. Scientists don’t know exactly what makescancercells start growing in the stomach. But they do know a few things that can raise your risk for the disease. One of them is infection with a common bacteria,H. pylori, which causes ulcers.Inflammationin your gut called gastritis, a certain type of long-lasting anemia called pernicious anemia, and growths in your stomach called polyps also can make you more likely to get cancer. Other things that seem to play a role in raising the risk include: Hereditary factors such as familial adenomatous polyposis, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (Lynch syndrome), and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome  Early on, stomach cancer may cause: Just havingindigestionorheartburnafter a meal doesn’t mean you havecancer. But if you feel these symptoms a lot, talk to your doctor. They can see if you have other risk factors and test you to look for any problems. As stomach tumors grow, you may have more serious symptoms, such as:  Doctors typically don't do routine screening for stomach cancer. That's mainly because it's not that common, so getting extra tests often isn't helpful.  In fact, the number ofstomach cancercases has declined over the past 60 years. If you're at higher risk for it though, talk to your doctor to see how to keep an eye out for it. You may get some of the same tests that you would get if you had symptoms and were looking for a diagnosis. To find out if you have stomach cancer, your doctor starts with aphysical exam. They'll also ask about your medical history to see if you have any risk factors for stomach cancer or any family members who’ve had it. Then, they might give you some tests, including:  Many treatments can fight stomach cancer. The one you and your doctor choose will depend on how long you've had the disease or how much it has spread in your body, called the stage of your cancer: Stage 0.This is when the inside lining of your stomach has a group of unhealthy cells that may turn into cancer. Surgery usually cures it. Your doctor may remove part or all of your stomach, as well as nearby lymph nodes -- small organs that are part of your body's germ-fighting system. Stage I.At this point, you have a tumor in your stomach's lining, and it may have spread into your lymph nodes. As with stage 0, you'll likely have surgery to remove part or all of your stomach and nearby lymph nodes. You might also getchemotherapyor chemoradiation. These treatments can be used before surgery to shrink the tumor and afterward to kill any cancer that's left. Chemotherapy uses drugs to attack cancer cells. Chemoradiation is chemo plusradiationtherapy, which destroys cancer cells with beams of high energy. Stage II.Cancer has spread into deeper layers of the stomach and maybe into nearby lymph nodes. Surgery to remove part or all of your stomach, as well as nearby lymph nodes, is still the main treatment. You're very likely to get chemo or chemoradiation beforehand, and you might get one of them after, too. Stage III.The cancer may now be in all layers of the stomach, as well as other organs close by, like the spleen or colon. Or, it may be smaller but reach deep into your lymph nodes. You usually have surgery to remove your entire stomach, along withchemoor chemoradiation. This can sometimes cure it. If not, it can at least help with symptoms. If you're too sick for surgery, you may get chemo, radiation, or both, depending on what your body can handle. Stage IV.In this last stage, cancer has spread far and wide to organs like the liver, lungs, or brain. It's much harder to cure, but your doctor can help manage it and give you some relief from symptoms. If the tumor blocks part of your GI system, you may get: Chemo, radiation, or both may be used at this stage, too. You might also get targeted therapy. These drugs attack cancer cells, but leave healthy ones alone, which may mean fewer side effects. Treat stomach infections.If you have ulcers from anH. pyloriinfection, get treatment.Antibioticscan kill the bacteria, and other drugs will heal the sores in the lining of your stomach to cut your risk of cancer. Eat healthy.Get more freshfruits and vegetableson your plate every day. They’re high in fiber and in somevitaminsthat can lower your cancer risk. Avoid very salty, pickled, cured, or smoked foods like hot dogs, processed lunch meats, or smoked cheeses. Keep yourweightat a healthy level, too. Being overweight or obese can also raise your risk of the disease. Don’t smoke.Your stomach cancer risk doubles if you usetobacco. Watchaspirinor NSAID use.If you take dailyaspirinto preventheartproblems or NSAID drugs forarthritis, talk to your doctor about how these drugs might affect your stomach. SOURCES: American Cancer Society: "Can Stomach Cancer Be Found Early," "Treatment Choices by Type and Stage of Stomach Cancer," "Chemotherapy for Stomach Cancer," "Radiation Therapy for Stomach Cancer," "Targeted Therapies for Stomach Cancer." Mayo Clinic: "Stomach Cancer." NIH, National Cancer Institute: "Gastric Cancer Treatment (PDQ)–Patient Version," "Targeted Cancer Therapies." University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center: "Stomach Cancer." National Cancer Institute. Harvard School of Public Health. American Academy of Family Physicians: "What Should I Know About Stomach Cancer?" The Journal of the American Medical Association, Jan. 14, 2004. What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.