About half of all kids andteensbite their nails. Many don’t grow out of it, either. If you’re an adult who bites your nails, you may have done it when you were younger and just never stopped. It could be your parents’ fault: Scientists aren’t sure ifnail bitingis genetic, but kids whose parents bite their nails are more likely to bite their nails, too. Studies show this happens even if the parents stop doing it before their child is born. Sometimes, nail biting can be a sign of emotional or mental stress. It tends to show up in people who are nervous, anxious or feeling down. It’s a way to cope with these feelings. You may also find yourself doing it when you’re bored,hungryor feeling insecure. Most nail biting is automatic -- you do it without thinking. Nail biting won’t typically cause permanent damage. But it definitely has its downsides: You may not see a change overnight, but with a little time and effort, you can bust your nail-biting habit. Try these tips: If you’re having trouble with the cold-turkey approach, take it a little at a time. Set small goals for yourself. Try to stop biting the nails on your right hand for a week. Or start even smaller: Choose one nail not to bite, like your thumb. Once you’ve kept it up for a while, put another nail in the “no-biting” zone. Keep going until all your fingers are off-limits. If you still struggle after trying multiple methods, talk to your doctor about whether therapy’s a good option to help you get to the bottom of the problem and take nail biting out of the picture. SOURCES:Williams, T.I.Behavior Research and Therapy, May 2007.KidsHealth.org: "Your Child's Habits."Mayo Clinic: "Nail biting: Does it cause long-term damage?"American Academy of Dermatology: "Nail Fungus & Nail Health."Fiser, J.E. and O'Donohue, W.T.Practitioner's Guide to Evidence-Based Psychotherapy, Springer, 2006.Ghanizadeh, A.Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health, June 2008.Scher, R.K. and Daniel, C.R.Nails: Diagnosis, Therapy, Surgery, 3rd ed., Saunders Elsevier, 2005.Tanaka, O.M.American Journal of Orthodontics & Dentofacial Orthopedics, August 2008. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.