You're enjoying a sunny afternoon on theplaygroundwhen suddenly you spot yourtoddlerwithteethembedded in a playmate's arm. Horrified, you rush to discipline your pint-sized vampire -- but what's the best way to handle the situation? Biting is a normal part ofchildhood development. Young children bite for many different reasons, from teething to seeing what reaction it will provoke. Many children between ages 1 and 3 go through a biting phase, which they eventually outgrow. Still, biting is something you want to discourage. Fortunately, there are ways to dissuade your little chomper from sinking theirteethinto everything that walks and talks. Kids bite for a number of reasons -- and most of them aren't intentionally malicious.  Practice prevention so that your child will be less likely to bite in the first place. Even with your best prevention efforts, biting incidents might still occur. When your child bites, firmly let your child know that this behavior is not acceptable by saying, "No. We don't bite!" Explain that biting hurts the other person. Then remove your child from the situation and give the child time to calm down. You might have heard from other parents that if your child bites you, bite your child back. This isn't good advice. Children learn by imitation. If you bite your child, the child is going to get the impression that this behavior is acceptable and they will be more likely to do it again. The same goes for hitting a child for biting. If you are unable to get your child to stop biting, the behavior could begin to have an impact on school and relationships. You or another adult might have to closely supervise interactions between your child and other kids. When biting becomes a habit or continues past age 4 or 5, it might stem from a more serious emotional problem. Talk to your child's health care provider, or enlist the help of a childpsychologistor therapist. The first thing to do for any biting injury is to wash the area with soap and water. Even little teeth can break theskin. If the bite is bleeding and the wound appears to be deep, call your child's doctor. The bite may need medical treatment, which could includeantibioticsor atetanusshot, or both. SOURCES: Iowa State University: "Biting." American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons: "Human Bites." Missouri Families.org: "What to Do About Biting?" American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry: "Fighting and Biting." University of New Hampshire Cooperative Extension: "When a Child Bites."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.