Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is a nutrient that occurs naturally in the body. CoQ10 is also in many foods we eat. CoQ10 acts as anantioxidant, which protects cells from damage and plays an important part in themetabolism. Although CoQ10 plays a key role in the body, most healthy people have enough CoQ10 naturally. There is some evidence that adding more -- in the form of CoQ10supplements-- may be beneficial. Increasing age and some medical conditions are associated with dropping levels of CoQ10. But in these cases, it’s uncertain that adding CoQ10 will have an effect. CoQ10 has been used to treat many different conditions. There's evidence that CoQ10 supplements can lowerblood pressureslightly. CoQ10 is also used to treat heart failure and otherheartconditions, possibly helping to improve some symptoms and lessen future cardiac risks when combined with regularmedications, but the evidence is conflicting. Though still controversial, some preliminary evidence suggests that CoQ10 may help to prevent or treat the adverse effects, such as muscle pains andliverproblems, of taking statin-typecholesterol drugs. Preliminary studies have shown that CoQ10 may slow, but not stop, the progression of Alzheimer's disease. Additional research is needed to confirm this effect. CoQ10 has also been studied as a preventive treatment formigraine headaches, though it may take several months to work. It has also been studied for low sperm count,cancer, HIV,muscular dystrophy, Parkinson’s disease,gum disease, and many other conditions. However, the research has not found any conclusive benefits. Although CoQ10 is sometimes sold as an energy supplement, there is no evidence that it will boost energy in a typical person. There is no established ideal dose of CoQ10. Studies have used doses of CoQ10 ranging from 50 milligrams to 1,200 milligrams in adults, sometimes split into several doses over the course of a day. A typical daily dose is 100 milligrams to 200 milligrams. Follow the instructions on the bottle or get advice from your doctor or a dietitian. Keep in mind that different supplement brands might have different ingredients and strengths. The amounts of CoQ10 in found naturally in food is much lower than that found insupplements. Good food sources of CoQ10 include: Given the lack of evidence about its safety, CoQ10 supplements are not recommended for children or for women who are pregnant orbreastfeeding. SOURCES:Paul M. Coates, PhD, director, Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.Longe, J., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, second edition, 2004.Natural Standard Patient Monograph: "Coenzyme Q10."Andrew Shao, PhD, vice president , Scientific & Regulatory Affairs, Council for Responsible Nutrition, Washington, D.C.Paul R. Thomas, EdD, RD, scientific consultant, Office of Dietary Supplements, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md.Vandenberg, B.Current Atherosclerosis Reports, January 2010.Mayo Clinic Drugs and Supplements: "Coenzyme Q10."      © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.