Tea tree oil is an extract from a plant native to Australia.Tea tree oil was used as a topical treatment by the Aboriginal people for centuries. Tea tree oil has been used traditionally as a topical antiseptic and antifungal treatment. One study found that a dilution of tea tree oil worked as well as 5%benzoyl peroxidein controlling thesymptoms of acne. It may be effective withtoenail fungusand possiblyathlete's foot, but more research is needed. Studies of tea tree oil for other conditions such asgum disease,vaginal infections, anddandruffhave been inconclusive. Tea tree oil has been proposed as a topical treatment for herpes labialis (the common cold sore), but it does not appear to be effective. Some laboratory studies have suggested that tea tree oil may be effective againstMRSA(methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus), a type ofstaph infectionthat's resistant to manyantibiotics. Although these studies are promising, more research needs to be done. Tea tree oil is only a topical treatment. It should never be taken by mouth. Because tea tree oil is an unproven treatment, there is no established dose. The concentrations of tea tree oil used in studies have varied depending on the medical condition. For instance, a 5% tea tree oil gel might be used for acne, while a 10% or higher tea tree oil cream might be used for athlete's foot. A 100% tea tree oil solution has been used withtoenail fungus. If you use tea tree oil, follow the instructions on the label or get advice from your doctor. There are no natural food sources of tea tree oil. Because of its toxicity, tea tree oil should never be swallowed. Given the lack of evidence about its safety, tea tree oil is not recommended for children or for women who are pregnant orbreastfeeding. SOURCES: Longe, J., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, second edition, 2004. Natural Standard Patient Monograph: "Tea Tree Oil." Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database: "Tea Tree Oil." Natural Standard: " Tea Tree Oil." Buck, D.The Journal of Family Practice,1994. Carson, C.The Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy,2001. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.