For thousands of years, leaves from theGinkgo bilobatree have been a common treatment in Chinese medicine. In the U.S., many take ginkgosupplementsin the belief that they will improve memory and sharpen thinking. Ginkgo improvesbloodflow to thebrainand acts as anantioxidant. These effects may translate into some benefits for certain medical problems, but the results have been mixed. Some studies have found that in healthy people, ginkgo might modestly boost memory and cognitive speed. Other studies have not found a benefit. Several ginkgo studies have shown that it can help with memory problems caused bydementiaor Alzheimer’s disease. It seems to help prevent the progression of dementia symptoms, especially if the dementia is thought to be the result of atherosclerotic vascular disease. It does not seem to prevent dementia orAlzheimer’s, however. There's good evidence that ginkgo might easeleg paincaused byclogged arteries. It might also help with some other circulation problems. In addition, ginkgo may relieve PMS symptoms, likebreasttenderness and mood changes. Researchers have studied ginkgo for many other conditions, includingADHD, depression and other psychological conditions, multiple sclerosis, andtinnitusfrom a vascular origin. Some people are also using ginkgo to prevent high altitude sickness, though studies have not yet established that it’s effective for that. Many uses of ginkgo show promise, but more research needs to be done. There is no standard dose of ginkgo biloba supplements. However, in medical studies, almost allclinical trialshave used a standardized extract of ginkgo, standardized to 24% flavone glycosides and 6% terpene lactones. A common dose in people with dementia is 40 milligrams of that extract three times daily. For improving cognitive function in healthy people, studies have used between 120 milligrams to 240 milligrams of the extract daily. The only source of ginkgo is the ginkgo tree. Most ginkgosupplementsare derived from the leaves. Ginkgo seeds can be dangerous, especially when raw. Given the potential risks, ginkgo is not recommended for children or for women who are pregnant orbreastfeeding. SOURCES: Fundukian, L., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, third edition, 2009. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database. Natural Standard. Do you know your vitamin ABCs? Ease hot flashes and other symptoms. Are you getting enough? Wonder pill or overkill? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.