SAM-e is a compound that's made naturally in the body and plays an important role in normal bodily function. A synthesized form of SAM-e is considered a supplement in the U.S., but SAM-e has been sold as a prescription drug in parts of Europe for decades. Its scientific name is S-adenosylmethionine. SAM-e is also known as ademetionine and SAMe. SAM-e has some evidence as a treatment for osteoarthritis pain. Some studies have found that oral SAM-e is as effective as NSAID painkillers, such asibuprofenandCelebrex. SAM-e takes longer to act than drugs do, but it also has fewer side effects thanNSAIDs. SAM-e has also been used to treat depression for many years. Some studies have found that SAM-e might work as well as tricyclicantidepressantsin relieving symptoms. However, many of these studies were flawed or too small to be conclusive. Other uses of SAM-e have not been studied as thoroughly. There's some evidence that SAM-e might help ease thepain of fibromyalgiaand spinal cord damage caused byHIV. SAM-e may also help control cholestasis -- a buildup of bile in theliver-- particularly in pregnant women during thethird trimester. One trial suggested that SAM-e might be helpful for adults withADHD. However, more research needs to be done. Some people use SAM-e as a treatment for other conditions, such asliverdisease, Alzheimer's disease, pain,migraine, andbursitis. We don't know the potential risks or benefits of these uses. There is no established ideal dose of SAM-e. Fordepression, many studies have started patients at 400 to 600 milligrams daily. For osteoarthritis, 600-1,200 milligrams daily of SAM-e divided into three doses is common. Ask your doctor for advice. Sometimes, the dose of SAM-e is increased gradually over a few weeks. This can help reduce side effects such as restlessness or anxiety. There are no food sources of SAM-e. Given the lack of evidence about safety, SAM-e is not recommended for children or for women who arebreastfeeding. Although SAM-e has been studied as a treatment for liver problems during pregnancy, pregnant women should only use SAM-e if a doctor recommends it. SOURCES: Fundukian, L., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, third edition, 2009. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center web site: “About Herbs: SAM-e.” Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality web site: "S-Adenosyl-L-Methionine for Treatment of Depression, Osteoarthritis, and Liver Disease." Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database web site: “SAMe.” Natural Standard Patient Monograph: “SAMe.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.