Potassiumis a mineral that's crucial for life. Potassium is necessary for theheart,kidneys, and other organs to work normally. Most people who eat a healthy diet should get enough potassium naturally. Low potassium is associated with a risk of high blood pressure, heart disease, stroke, arthritis,cancer, digestive disorders, and infertility. For people with low potassium, doctors sometimes recommend improved diets -- or potassiumsupplements-- to prevent or treat some of these conditions. Potassium deficiencies are more common in people who: The Institute of Medicine has set an adequate intake for potassium. Getting this amount of potassium from diet, with or without supplements, should be enough to keep you healthy. The FDA has determined that foods that contain at least 350 milligrams of potassium can bear the following label: "Diets containing foods that are good sources of potassium and low in sodium may reduce the risk ofhigh blood pressureandstroke." Category Adequate Intake (AI) CHILDREN 0-6 months 400 mg/day 7-12 months 700 mg/day 1-3 years 3,000 mg/day 4-8 years 3,800 mg/day 9-13 years 4,500 mg/day 14 years and up 4,700 mg/day ADULTS 18 years and up 4,700 mg/day Pregnant women 4,700 mg/day Breastfeedingwomen 5,100 mg/day Always take potassiumsupplementswith a full glass of water or juice. There is no set upper limit for potassium. So it's not clear exactly how much potassium you can take safely. However, very high doses of potassium can be deadly. Good natural food sources of potassium include: Keep in mind that some types of cooking, such as boiling, can decrease the potassium content in some foods.  SOURCES:Longe, J., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, second edition, 2004.National Institute of Health Medline Plus: "Potassium."United States Department of Agriculture: "Dietary Reference Intakes: Electrolytes and Water."FDA, CFSAN: "FDA-approved potassium health claim notification for potassium containing foods." Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database: "Potassium."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.