Chamomile has been used as a traditional medicine for thousands of years to calm anxiety and settle stomachs. In the U.S., chamomile is best known as an ingredient in herbal tea. Chamomile is considered a safe plant and has been used in many cultures forstomachailments and as a mild sedative. Some studies, primarily using combinations of chamomile with other plants, show it may have health benefits. However, as with any combination product, it is hard to say that a benefit comes from any one plant. One product with chamomile and other herbal medicines has been shown to easeupset stomach, heartburn, nausea, andvomiting. Another mixture with chamomile seems to helpcolickybabies. A mouth rinse with chamomile might relievemouthsores caused bycancertreatments. Some research suggests that chamomile could help with other conditions, likediarrheain children,hemorrhoids,anxiety, andinsomnia. When used on theskin, chamomile might help with skin irritation and wound healing. Some research has documented that it may be as effective ashydrocortisonecream foreczema. There is no standard dose of chamomile. Studies have used between 900 milligrams to 1200 milligrams daily in capsule form. The most common form is a tea, and some people drink one to four cups daily. To make chamomile tea, steep a chamomile tea bag or chamomile flowers in hot water for 5 to 10 minutes in a mug covered with a saucer. Then, drink the infusion when it has cooled to the point it is safe to drink. Ask your doctor for other advice. Chamomile flowers are a common ingredient in teas. They're also used as a flavoring in other foods and drinks. Given the lack of evidence about its long-term safety, chamomile is not recommended for women who are pregnant orbreastfeeding. Talk to a pediatrician before giving chamomile to infants and children. SOURCES: Fundukian, L., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, third edition, 2009. Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center web site: “About Herbs: Chamomile (German).” National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine web site: “Herbs at a Glance: Chamomile.” Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database web site: “German Chamomile,” "Roman Chamomile." Natural Standard Patient Monograph: “Chamomile.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.