Saw palmetto is commonly used in Europe and the United States as a treatment forenlarged prostate. Some small studies have shown benefit. However, several large studies do not show that saw palmetto reduces the size of theprostateor eases the urinary symptoms that come with anenlarged prostate. You might hear a doctor or nurse call that condition “benign prostate hyperplasia,” orBPH. Before you take saw palmetto, or any supplement for that matter, talk with your doctor first. They may interfere with prescription medicines, other treatments, or tests you might need. Saw palmetto (Serenoa repens) is a palm that grows in the Southern coastal regions of the United States. It is about 2 to 4 feet high. Its leaves are fan-shaped and sharp, and it makes a lot of berries. These fruits have a long history of use as medicine. Some Native Americans used them to help with urinary problems in men. Some small studies have shown saw palmetto might help you withBPHsymptoms in several ways. Among them: Can You Take It for Other Problems? You may have heard about people taking saw palmetto for other reasons than BPH. Some of them include: So far, studies have shown limited results for saw palmetto helping with these other types of problems. For BPH, studies have used a daily intake of 320 milligrams of saw palmetto split into two doses. The doses will be different in other forms, such as tinctures (a liquid preparation). Get advice from your doctor. It may take 4 to 6 weeks for saw palmetto to have an effect. There are no food sources of saw palmetto. Side effects are uncommon and typically mild. The most common are: Men taking saw palmetto have also reported erection problems, testicular pain, and tenderness in thebreasts. You may also want to talk your doctor or pharmacist about the following: Interactions:If you take any medicines regularly, talk to your doctor before you start using saw palmettosupplements. They could mix poorly with medicines such asaspirin, NSAID painkillers such asibuprofen(Motrin,Advil) andnaproxen(Aleve),blood thinners, and hormone treatments. In combination withginkgo bilobaor garlic, saw palmetto might seriously increase the risk of bleeding. Other health conditions:People who have diseases or health conditions should not use saw palmetto without talking to a doctor first. Saw palmetto is not recommended for children or for women who arepregnantorbreastfeeding. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Saw Palmetto: Background.” Winchester Hospital (Massachusetts): “Health Library: Saw Palmetto.” Longe, J., ed.The Gale Encyclopedia of Alternative Medicine, second edition, 2004.Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center: "About Herbs: Saw Palmetto."National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine: "Herbs at a Glance: Saw Palmetto."Natural Standard Patient Monograph: "Saw Palmetto."The Journal of Urology:“A Prospective, 1-Year Trial Using Saw Palmetto Versus Finasteride in the Treatment of Category III Prostatitis/Chronic Pelvic Pain Syndrome.” Here are 5 questions to discuss with your doctor first. Learn which might help, along with words of caution. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.