Swallowing seems simple, but it's actually pretty complicated. It takes yourbrain, several nerves and muscles, two muscular valves, and an open, unconstrictedesophagus, or swallowing tube to work just right. Your swallowing tract goes from the mouth to thestomach. The act of swallowing normally happens in three phases. In the first phase, food or liquid is contained in themouthby thetongueand palate (oral cavity). This phase is the only one we can control. The second phase begins when thebrainmakes the decision to swallow. At this point, a complex series of reflexes begin. The food is thrust from the oral cavity into the throat (pharynx). At the same time, two other things happen: A muscular valve at the bottom of the pharynx opens, allowing food to enter the esophagus, and other muscles close the airway (trachea) to prevent food from entering the airways. This second phase takes less than half a second. The third phase starts when food enters the esophagus. The esophagus, which is about nine inches long, is a muscular tube that produces waves of coordinatedcontractions(peristalsis). As the esophagus contracts, a muscular valve at the end of the esophagus opens and food is propelled into the stomach. The third phase of swallowing takes six to eight seconds to complete. A wide range of diseases can cause swallowing problems, which your doctor may call "dysphagia." These include: Under normal circumstances, people rarely choke during a meal. Occasionally, food will stick in the esophagus for a few seconds (especially solid foods), but will pass spontaneously or can be washed down easily with liquids. But there are a number of symptoms that you should get checked for a possible swallowing problem, including: Immediate medical attention is needed when food becomes lodged in the esophagus for more than 15 minutes and doesn't pass spontaneously or with liquids. Some people don't know that they have swallowing problems, because they compensate unconsciously by choosing foods that are easier to eat, or they eat more slowly. However, untreated swallowing problems raise the risk of choking or having large pieces of solid food lodged in the esophagus. If you think you have a swallowing problem, talk to your health care provider. You may get tests such as: Cineradiography:An imaging test in which a camera is used to film internal body structures. During the test, you will be asked to swallow a barium preparation (liquid or other form that lights up under X-ray). An X-ray machine with videotaping capability will be used to view the barium preparations movement through the esophagus. This is often performed under the guidance of a speech pathologist, an expert in swallowing as well as speech. Upper endoscopy:A flexible, narrow tube (endoscope) is passed into the esophagus and projects images of the inside of the pharynx and esophagus on a screen for evaluation. Manometry:This test measures the timing and strength of esophagealcontractionsand muscular valve relaxation. Impedance and pH test:This test can determine if acid reflux is causing a swallowing problem. Treatment depends on the type of swallowing problem you have. Sometimes, a swallowing problem will resolve itself without treatment. On other occasions, swallowing problems can be managed easily. Complex swallowing problems may require treatment by a specialist or several specialists. If you have a chewing or swallowing problem there are several things you can do to make eating and drinking easier and safer, including: Positioning Dining environment Amount and rate Swallowing Salivamanagement Food consistency Takingmedications SOURCE: National Institutes of Health. Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.