You’ve been running afeverfor the past few days. Now, you have a bumpyrashthat’s spreading fast and it hurts. These symptoms can point to a number of health conditions, including one you may never have heard of: Sweet syndrome. Usually, this rareskincondition (also known as acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis) isn’t serious and clears up without treatment. But it can be triggered by another health problem, such as an infection or possibly cancer. It’s not contagious, so you can’t catch it from -- or give it to -- someone. Middle-aged women are most likely to get it. But men and even babies can get it. The biggest sign is the rash that seems to appear out of nowhere a few days or weeks after a fever. Small red or purple bumps or lumps typically show up first on your arms, legs, face, or neck. But they can pop up in other places, too. They tend to grow quickly and eventually join together to make large patches. The rash can be painful. You may getblistersor pimple-like bumps. They can break open and become infected. In addition to fever and rash, other symptoms include:  Most of the time, it happens on its own and doctors can’t find a reason. Other times, it happens when yourimmune systemreacts to another problem, like: A reaction from a drug also can bring on Sweet syndrome. Possible drugs include common ones such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs(Advil,Motrin). But a medication called granulocyte-colony stimulating factor that’s used to help fight infections in some people withcanceris the most common culprit. Your doctor might be able to tell that it’s Sweet syndrome just by looking at your rash. But you’ll probably have tests to rule out other conditions or look for what might be causing the problem. These include: If your doctor thinks another condition might be causing the problem, they also might recommend imaging tests like X-rays or a computerized tomography (CT) scan. That involves X-rays taken from different angles and then put together for a more complete picture.  Sweet syndrome can go away by itself without treatment if it’s not caused by another health condition. But this could take weeks or months. Corticosteroid pills can help with redness,itching, swelling, and allergic reactions.Steroidcreams or gels also may help -- especially with smaller lumps -- and can ease pain, too. If you have very painful or swollen lumps, your doctor might put steroids directly into them. Ifcanceror another health problem is causing your Sweet syndrome, treating it can clear your skin. If it’s caused by a drug, the rash probably will go away when you stop taking it. Most of the time, the rash heals well without leaving scars unless you had open sores. But your skin may be a different color for months afterward. Sweet syndrome may come back after treatment -- that’s more likely ifcancercaused it. Its return may mean your cancer has come back if it was inremission(you no longer had any cancer cells). See your doctor right away if you notice symptoms again. Photo Credit: ©DermNet NZ / www.dermnetnz.org 2022 SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Sweet’s Syndrome.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Sweet Syndrome.” National Institutes of Health; Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Acute Febrile Neutrophilic Dermatosis.” Cohen, P.Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases, July 2007. Multiple Myeloma Research Foundation: “What are colony-stimulating factors?” British Association of Dermatologists: “Sweet’s Syndrome (Acute Febrile Neutrophilic Dermatosis).” National Organization for Rare Disorders – Photo Caption UpToDate – Photo Caption Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.