Syphilisis a highly contagious disease that’s mostly spread through sexual activity, including oral andanal sex. The infected person often doesn’t know that they have the disease and passes it on to their sexual partner. Syphilis was once a major public health threat. It can cause serious long-term problems such asarthritis,brain damage, and blindness. There wasn’t an effective treatment until the late 1940s, when the antibioticpenicillinwas developed. According to the CDC, the rate of new cases of syphilis plummeted in the 1990s. In 2000, it reached an all-time low since reporting began in 1941. But the disease has been on the increase ever since. In 2021, the rate of syphilis in the U.S. reached 51.5 cases per 100,000 people, the highest rate since 1990. Syphilis is caused by the bacteriaTreponema pallidum. You get it through direct contact with a syphilis sore on someone else’s body. This usually  happens during sexual activity, but the bacteria can also get into your body through cuts on yourskinor through your mucous membranes. Syphilis can’t be spread by toilet seats, doorknobs,swimmingpools, hot tubs, bathtubs, shared clothing, or eating utensils. Any sexually active person can get syphilis. But you’re at higher risk of getting syphilis if you: Syphilis infections affect groups in the U.S. differently: Syphilis infection has three stages: Early or primary syphilis.People with primary syphilis get one or more sores called chancres. They’re usually small, painless ulcers. They happen on your genitals, on youranusor rectum, or in or around yourmouthbetween 10 and 90 days (3 weeks on average) after you’re exposed to the disease. Even if you don’t treat them, they heal without a scar within 6 weeks. But treatment will keep your disease from moving to the next stage. Secondary syphilis.This stage begins 6 weeks to 6 months after you’re exposed. It may last 1 to 3 months. People with secondary syphilis usually get syphilis rash, a rosy "copper penny"rashon the palms of their hands and soles of theirfeet. They may also have different rashes on other parts of their body. These may look like rashes caused by other diseases. People may have moist,wart-like lesions in their groin, white patches on the inside of their mouth,swollen lymph glands,fever,hair loss, and weight loss. As with primary syphilis, symptoms of secondary syphilis will get better without treatment. Tertiary syphilis.If the infection isn't treated, it may move on to a stage marked by severe problems with your heart, brain, and nerves. You could become paralyzed, blind, or deaf, or get dementia or impotence. It can even be deadly. Other types of syphilis include: If you don’t get treatment, syphilis can have complications all over your body: The CDC says women should be tested for syphilis at least once during pregnancy. It’s best if they’re tested at their first prenatal visit. Depending on how long pregnant women have had syphilis, they have a high chance of stillbirth (birth of an infant who has died before delivery) or of giving birth to a baby who dies shortly after birth. An infected baby may be born without symptoms but could have them within a few weeks if the disease isn’t treated right away. These signs and symptoms can be very serious. Untreated babies may have delays in their development, have seizures, or die. Your doctor will need to do a physical exam. They might give you tests including: Syphilis is curable with quick diagnosis and treatment. But if it’s treated too late, it can permanently damage your heart and brain even after the infection is gone. If you've had syphilis for less than a year, one dose of penicillin is usually enough to kill the infection. If you’re allergic to penicillin, you might get another antibiotic instead, like doxycycline. If you’re in a later stage of the disease, you’ll need more doses. If you’re pregnant and allergic to penicillin, your doctor will probably have you go through a process called desensitization, which will let you take the drug safely. Don’t have sexual contact until the infection is completely gone. Your sexual partners should also be tested and, if necessary, treated. Some people with syphilis have an immune system reaction called a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction several hours after their first treatment. This might include fever, chills, headache, upset stomach, rash, or joint and muscle pain. These problems usually go away within 24 hours. You can get syphilis again after treatment kills the infection. The only way to avoid syphilis altogether is to not have anal, oral, or vaginal sex. But you can reduce your risk of syphilis infection: If you are in a relationship with someone who has syphilis, you're at risk as well. You may need to get treatment based on your specific case. Talk to your doctor to figure out the best way to treat or prevent a syphilis infection.  SOURCES: CDC: “Syphilis – CDC Fact Sheet,” “The State of STDs – Infographic.” Mayo Clinic: “Syphilis.” American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Chlamydia, Gonorrhea, and Syphilis.” Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai: “Syphilis – primary.” Minnesota Department of Health: “About Syphilis.” BMJ: “Syphilis.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Syphilis.” See pictures and get the facts. 13 things that can kill your sex drive. How to stop them from spreading. What are the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.