Are you thinking about getting an ear or body piercing? Here are some key questions to ask yourself before you get pierced:  When done in a clean and professional environment, piercing is usually safe. But if piercing equipment is unclean, there is a risk of getting blood-transmitted diseases. These include: Even in a sterile (germ-free) environment, some common risks of piercing are: In general, it's a good idea to talk to your doctor before a piercing if you: A sterile environment is the most important thing to consider when deciding where to go to get pierced. Here are some tips for finding a safe place to get your piercing done: NEVER do this: Many states regulate body piercing, but not all. Before getting your piercing, you should always check for these signs of a safe piercing environment: Needles are generally considered cleaner and easier to sterilize than piercing guns. Your piercer should only use a piercing gun that is for one-time use or has sterilized disposable cassettes. Piercing guns should only be used on earlobe piercings. That's because they can cause more damage to the skin tissue than needles. Healing times can vary depending on the location of the piercing. Here are the average healing times for common piercings: Remember, with mouth or lip piercing, jewelry can cause cracks in your teeth or receding gums. Lip piercings and mouth piercings can get infected more easily. Your piercer will give you specific instructions for cleaning your piercing. Here are some general dos and don'ts for new piercings: Do: Don't: Some temporary pain or swelling is normal after a piercing. But if pain continues, it could mean an infection. Be extra careful if you get an oral piercing. These are more susceptible to infection because of bacteria in the mouth. Contact with jewelry against the teeth can also cause your teeth to crack or chip. Watch out for these signs of infection: If you think your piercing may be infected: Some people have sensitivities to certain kinds of metal jewelry. Signs you could be allergic to your new piercing include: To avoid an allergic reaction, use only nontoxic metals, such as: SOURCES: TeensHealth from Nemours: "Body Piercing." Palo Alto Medical Foundation web site: "Piercing." Family Doctor web site: "Body Piercing." Understand how your body is developing. How much do you know about it? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.