Teething is when your baby’s teeth start to come through their gum line. Another word for it is odontiasis. Most babies begin to teethe between 4 and 7 months old, but some start much later. There’s no need to worry if your baby’s teeth come in on another timetable -- it can be different for every baby. The symptoms aren’t the same for everybaby, but they may include: Teething can be painful, but it doesn’t usually make babies sick. Call your doctor if yourbabyhasdiarrhea,vomiting,rasheson the body, a higherfever, orcoughand congestion. These aren’t normal signs of teething. You also should call the pediatrician if your baby’s gums are bleeding or you see any pus or swelling of their face. When and how teeth come in can be different for every baby and may be based on family history. But most of the time, the lower front two teeth come in first between 6 and 10 months, followed by the opposite top two teeth and the two on either side of those between 8 and 13 months. Next come the two on either side of the bottom front teeth, then the first molars appear between 10 and 16 months. The teeth in front of the first molars are next, and the back molars are the last ones to come in. In all, 20 “baby teeth” will eventually be in place, usually by age 3. What works to soothe a friend’s baby might not work for yours. You may need to try different things to help your little one feel better: Never put anything in your baby’s mouth that isn’t specifically approved to help soothe teething. Even some products described as teethers or teething aids aren’t safe choices, including ones: Another reason to be aware of the material used to make the teethers: Some can be made from harmful substances, like lead. Look for ones made of rubber. Child health experts don’t recommend teething necklaces. They’re dangerous: They can strangle the baby. They also can choke if the necklace breaks and they swallow the beads. If you do choose to use one, make sure to: You may have heard that amber teething necklaces release apainreliever when heated. That’s not proven, and doctors say using one is not a good idea. Medicine that you rub on your baby’s gums to stop the pain of teething may not help. It quickly washes away in the mouth and may numb the back of their throat and make it hard for them to swallow. Stay away from over-the-counter teething gels and liquids that have the ingredientbenzocaine. The FDA says this ingredient shouldn’t be given to children under 2. It can cause rare but serious side effects. A small dose of a children’s pain reliever, such as acetaminophen, may help your baby. Don’t use ibuprofen for an infant under 6 months old, and ask your doctor before giving your baby anymedication. Use it exactly as the doctor says. Teething can be rough for you and your baby at first. But it’ll get easier as you both learn how to soothe each new tooth that pops out. Good oral hygiene is important, even before your baby has teeth: Your child should see a pediatric dentist when the first tooth appears, or no later than their first birthday. SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: “Teething: 4 to 7 Months,” “Teething Pain," “Children’s Oral Health," “Amber Teething Necklaces: A Caution for Parents." American Dental Association/Mouth Healthy: “Teething.” Massignan, C.Pediatrics, published online March 2016. FDA: “FDA Drug Safety Communication: Reports of a rare, but serious and potentially fatal adverse effect with the use of OTC benzocaine gels and liquids applied to the gums or mouth.” American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: “Frequently Asked Questions.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Dental Hygiene: How To Care For Your Baby’s Teeth.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.