With proper care, yourteethand gums can stay healthy throughout your life. The healthier yourteethand gums are, the less risk you have fortooth decayandgum disease. There are five basic steps to caring for teeth and gums: Brush at least twice a day. If you can, brush after every meal. Ideally wait 30 minutes after eating; this will allow any enamel that softened from acid during eating to re-harden and not get brushed away. Brushing removesplaque, a film of bacteria that clings to teeth. When bacteria in plaque come into contact with food, they produce acids. These acids lead tocavities. To brush: You can wear down your enamel if you brush too fast and hard. Hold a brush with a soft bristle at about a 45-degree angle to your gums. Then move it back and forth in short, gentle strokes, about the distance of one tooth. Wait for up to an hour after eating sweets or citrus fruits before you brush your teeth. Acidic foods can soften enamel and may make it easier for you to damage it. Floss teeth at least once a day. Flossing gets rid of food and plaque between the teeth, where your toothbrush cannot reach. If plaque stays between teeth, it can harden intotartar, which must be removed by a dentist or hygienist. To floss:  Mouthwashes do more than just freshen your breath. Rinse with an antiseptic mouthwash at least once a day to kill bacteria that cause plaque and earlygum disease. A fluoride rinse can help prevent tooth decay and cavities. Some rinses can do both.  For good dental health, eat a variety of foods, but minimize those that contain sugars and starches. These foods produce the most acids in the mouth, and the longer they stay in the mouth, the more they can damage the teeth. Hard "sucking candies" are especially harmful because they stay in the mouth a long time. Snacking on sugary foods can lead to tooth decay, because most people don't brush after snacks. Starchy snack foods, like potato chips, stick to the teeth. Avoid snacking on: Calciumin food counters acids in yourmouththat cause decay. It also helps keep your bones and teeth strong. Milk, cheese, and other dairy products help protect and strengthen enamel. Choose low-fat or fat-free items to help keep calories down. If you don't eat dairy, look for foods withcalciumadded. Visit your dentist at least once every 6 months. To keep your teeth and gums healthy, it's important to have regular check-ups and professional cleanings. You should also see your dentist if you have pain in your teeth, pain in your mouth, or bleeding,swollen gums. You can also ask your dentist aboutdental sealants. A sealant is a material used to coat the top, chewing surfaces of the teeth. This coating protects the tooth from decay and usually lasts a long time, but can only be placed on a tooth without decay. It is usually placed on children’s teeth as they get their permanent teeth. If you have severe heartburn,stomachacids may escape and eventually reach your mouth, where they can erode (damage) enamel. Theeating disorderbulimia, in which people vomit food after they eat, is another threat to your enamel. If you have either condition, talk to your doctor about treatment. Whenswimmingpools aren't chlorinated properly, the water may become too acidic. When that happens, the water can damage teeth that get wet. Check with the recreation center or gym where you swim to make sure the pool's chlorine levels are checked regularly. Whileswimming, keep your mouth closed so your teeth don’t get wet. Salivahelps wash away food and bacteria that can lead to cavities. It also fights the effects of acidic foods. Drink water often to keep your mouth clean and moist. If you exercise hard, be sure to rehydrate during and after yourworkout. Chewing sugarless gum or sucking on sugarless hard candy can also help keepsalivaflowing in your mouth. Some medical conditions andmedicationscan causedry mouth. Talk to your doctor about treatments. Some people grind their upper and lower teeth together, especially at night. Over time, it can wear down the enamel. Talk to your dentist if you've got the grinding habit. They may suggest a custom-fitted mouth guard that can protect your teeth. SOURCES: American Dental Association. Leslie Seldin, DDS, spokesperson, American Dental Association. Richard Price, DMD, spokesperson, American Dental Association. Pamela L. Quinones, registered dental hygienist; past president, American Dental Hygienists' Association (ADHA). Mortality and Morbidity WeeklyReview, July 1985. American Dental Association: "Diet and Tooth Decay," "Cleaning Your Teeth and Gums," "Fluoride." Hemingway, C.British Dental Journal, 2006. American Dental Hygienists' Association: "Fluoride Facts." Shroeder, P.Annals of Internal Medicine, June 1995. Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.