Tennis elbowis painful weakening of the tendons that join your forearm muscles to your bones. It happens when you work yourelbowtoo much by repeating certain motions. You might hear your doctor call it lateral epicondylitis. Despite the name, tennis causes only about 5% of cases. You can get it after doing any kind of repetitive movement, like painting or usinghandtools. Tennis elbow is a common injury that usually needs only minor treatment, but it takes time and rest to heal. Thepainis focused on the outside of your arm, where your forearm meets your elbow. It’s related to a muscle and tendons in your forearm. Tendons connect your muscles to your bones. When you repeat certain arm movements, the tendons at the elbow end of a certain muscle -- the extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) muscle -- may get small tears. The tears may put stress on the rest of your arm, making it painful to lift and grip things. If you don’t get treatment, the pain can last a long time. The most common symptom of tennis elbow is an ache on the outside of your elbow. Over time -- from a few weeks to a few months -- the ache can turn into a constant pain. The outside of your elbow may be too painful to touch. The pain might go into your forearm and wrist. You may feel pain when doing nothing at all, but usually pain is triggered by particular movements, especially wrist movements that tug on the tendon at the elbow. You can have tennis elbow in one or both arms. If you have symptoms after a week or so, or if they get worse, it’s time to call your doctor. Also, call your doctor if you have any of these symptoms: Tennis elbow affects up to 3% of people, mostly between the ages of 30 and 50. Any repetitive, forceful motion that pulls on the tendon and muscle around your elbow can cause tennis elbow. In tennis, hitting a backhand puts some stress on your forearm muscles, which clench when you hit the ball. If your technique is off or if you grip the racquet too tightly, it puts more stress on the tendons that connect your forearm muscles to your elbow. That can cause the tendons to get small tears. You can get tennis elbow from playing other racquet sports, such as squash or racquetball. You can also get it from jobs or activities that involve repetitive arm motion, such as: A direct blow to your elbow can also make the tendons swell. Your doctor will ask about your symptoms and medical history. They’ll check for pain in parts of your arm and ask you to do some simple motions such as cocking your wrist on an outstretched arm while they press on it. Often, that’s enough to tell if you have tennis elbow. If your doctor thinks there may be something else going on, you may get tests such as: Your doctor will first tell you to stop playing sports or doing certain kinds of work so your arm can rest. They’ll probably recommendphysical therapyandmedicationssuch asaspirin,ibuprofen, ornaproxen. Your doctor might also give you: Up to 95% of people who have tennis elbow get better without surgery. But you might need it if you still have pain after 6 to 12 months. Your doctor can remove damaged tissue through cuts in your arm. Some small changes might help lower your risk of tennis elbow. SOURCES: University of Rochester Medical Center: “Tennis Elbow.” Cleveland Clinic: “Tennis Elbow (lateral epicondylitis).” American Society for Surgery of the Hand: “Tennis Elbow -- Lateral Epicondylitis.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Tennis Elbow (Lateral Epicondylitis).” SportsInjuryClinic.net: “Tennis Elbow.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Tennis Elbow.” Proceedings of Baylor University Medical Center: “Tennis elbow.” Mayo Clinic: “Electromyography (EMG).” Orth Info: “Tennis Elbow (Lateral Epicondylitis).” Harvard Health Publications, Harvard Medical School: “What to Do About Tennis Elbow.” Mayo Clinic: “Tennis Elbow.” Family Doctor.org: “Tennis Elbow.” NHS: “Tennis Elbow.” University of Rochester: “Tennis Elbow.” Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.