Tension headaches are dull pain, tightness, or pressure that can feel like a clamp squeezing your skull. They’re also calledstress headaches, and they’re the most common type for adults. There are two types: These headaches can last 30 minutes to a few days. The episodic kind usually starts slowly, often in the middle of the day. Chronic ones come and go over a longer period of time. The pain may get stronger or ease up through the day, but it’s almost always there. Although your head hurts, tension headaches usually don't keep you from your daily activities, and they don’t affect your vision, balance, or strength. Where does it hurt? This type of headache can: Common symptoms include: Unlike withmigraineheadaches, you won’t have other nerve symptoms, such as muscle weakness or blurred vision. And tension headaches don’t usually cause severe sensitivity to light or noise, stomach pain, nausea, or vomiting. There's no single cause of tension headaches. They don’t run in families. Some people get them because of tight muscles in the back of the neck and scalp. Tension headache triggers Most of the time, tension headaches are triggered by stress from work, school, family, friends, or other relationships. Episodic ones are usually set off by a single stressful situation or a buildup of stress. Daily stress can lead to the chronic kind. Tension headache triggers may include: Up to 80% of adults in the U.S. get them from time to time. About 3% have chronic daily tension headaches. Women are twice as likely to get them as men. Most people with episodic tension headaches have them no more than once or twice a month, but they can happen more often. Many people with the chronic type have usually had them for more than 60 to 90 days. See your doctor if you have frequent or severe headaches, or if they get in the way of your daily life. Call 911 for a headache that is sudden and severe or also makes your face droop, causes weakness or numbness, or makes it hard to talk, see, or think. Your doctor may diagnose you based only on your symptoms. They might ask you things like: They can also do tests to rule out other conditions. These include: It’s best to treat tension headaches soon after they begin, when the symptoms are still mild. The goal is to ease your pain and prevent more of them from happening. Medications Over-the-counter (OTC) painkillers are often the first treatments for tension headaches. People with the chronic kind can use some of these drugs to prevent headaches. But if you take them a lot, they can lead to what’s called a medication overuse orrebound headache. Common OTC treatments include: If OTC pain relievers don't help, your doctor may prescribe a stronger medicine such as: They could also recommend amuscle relaxerlike: Some other kinds of drugs can keep you from getting a tension headache. You take them every day, even if you aren’t in pain, so that you end up using less medication over time. Your doctor may prescribe: Keep in mind that medications don't cure headaches and that, over time, pain relievers and other medicines might not help as much as they did at first. Plus, all medicines have side effects. If you take one regularly, talk with your doctor about the pros and cons. You'll still need to identify and deal with the things that are causing your headaches. Supplements Some studies have found that certain dietary supplements are effective against migraine headaches. They may also help prevent tension headaches. These supplements include: Talk with your doctor before starting any supplements. Try these treatments to make your headaches less severe or less frequent. Find ways to relax and manage stress like: Lifestyle changes may also help. Consider these: How do you tell them apart? Tension headaches: Migraines: Photo Credit: AJPhoto / Science Source SOURCES: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "Headache: Hope Through Research." National Headache Foundation: "Tension-Type Headache." MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia: "Tension headache." American Headache Society: "Types of Headaches." University Health Services, University of California, Berkeley: "Tension Headache Fact Sheet,” “Headaches.” National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health: “Headaches: In Depth.” Mayo Clinic: “Tension headache,” “Tension-type headaches: Self-care measures for relief.” Pain research and treatment: “Is There a Relation between Tension-Type Headache, Temporomandibular Disorders and Sleep?” PennState Hershey: “Tension headache.” Wayne State University Physician Group: “Tension Headache.” Harvard Health Publishing: “What type of headache do you have?” “Tension Headache,” “4 ways to tame tension headaches.” UpToDate: “Evaluation of headache in adults,” “Patient education: Headache causes and diagnosis in adults (Beyond the Basics),” "Tension-type headache in adults: Preventive treatment." National Health Service: “Tension-type headaches.” Temple Health: “Tension Headache.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Tension Headaches.” Medscape: “Tension Headache.” Minneapolis Clinic of Neurology: “Headaches/Migraine.” Cleveland Clinic: “Tension-Type Headaches,” “Rebound Headaches.” American Family Physician: “Tension-Type Headache.” American Migraine Foundation: “Tension-type headache.” Mount Sinai Hospital: “Headache Triggers and Tips,” “Tension Headache.” University of Michigan Health System: “Tension Headaches,” “When Should You See a Doctor for Headache or Migraines?” President’s Council on Fitness, Sports & Nutrition. University of Wisconsin Hospitals and Clinics Authority: “Headaches: Should I Take Prescription Medicine for Tension Headaches?” National Stroke Association: “Act FAST.” What aura looks like, triggers, and more. Get the truth about migraine. Could pot ease your pain? Test your knowledge of triggers, types, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.