Tetralogy of Fallotoccurs in approximately 400 out of every million live births. This congenital heart condition causes mixing of oxygen-poor blood with oxygen-rich blood, which is then pumped out of the heart into the circulatory system of blood vessels.  The normal heart works as follows:   The 4 abnormalities (tetralogy) of the heart described by Fallot include the following:  Tetralogy of Fallot accounts for 10%-15% of all congenital (newborn) heart defects. Infants with this abnormality develop signs of the condition very early in life. Tetralogy of Fallot occurs during development of the fetus, before birth, and is therefore termed a congenital birth defect. An error occurs as the fetal heart separates into the chambers, valves, and other structures that make up the normal human heart. No one is really sure why this occurs. Most infants with tetralogy of Fallot develop cyanosis in the first year of life. The following symptoms suggest tetralogy of Fallot: Episodes of extreme blue coloring (called hypercyanosis or simply "tet spells") occur in many children, usually in the first 2-3 years of life. Sometimes tetralogy of Fallot goes undiagnosed for several months to a year. Diagnosing conditions such as tetralogy of Fallot is one of the goals of routine checkups with your doctor. Take your child to their health care provider if the child develops a bluish color, has breathing difficulties, seizures, fainting, fatigue, slow growth, or developmental delay. A medical professional should establish the cause of these problems. If you cannot reach your child's health care provider or if the child develops any of the following symptoms, take the child to a hospital emergency department right away: Even if the bluish color and other symptoms have resolved by the time the child gets medical attention, the health care provider will immediately suspect a heart problem. Medical tests will focus on identifying the cause of the cyanosis. If your child starts to turn blue, place the child on their back in the knee-to-chest position and call 911 or your local emergency number. Surgery is the primary way to correct the heart problem. Your child may be prescribed medication for tet spells. You will also be given information for dealing with future tet spells. The Blalock-Taussig operation: A palliative procedure performed in smaller infants to increase blood flow to the lungs. This allows the child to grow big enough to have complete surgical repair. A connection is made between one of the major arteries of the body, usually the right subclavian artery, and the right pulmonary artery, which increases the amount of red oxygenated blood reaching the lungs, relieving cyanosis with dramatic relief of the patient's symptoms. Total correction: The hole in the ventricular septum (between the ventricles) is closed with a patch and the obstruction to right ventricular outflow, pulmonic stenosis, is opened. These corrections allow blood flow to the lungs for oxygenation before being pumped out into the body. The timing of the operation depends on symptoms. Surgery usually is performed within the first 2 years of life. Operative mortality rates have dramatically dropped over the last 20 years. Still, about 1%-5% of children who undergo complete correction die during or immediately after the procedure, secondary to other additional defects in the body and/or heart, and the heart lung bypass procedure itself. Your health care provider should schedule regular follow-up visits for your child. At these visits, the child should be checked for abnormal heart rhythms, which may develop in children who have undergone surgical correction for tetralogy of Fallot. After successful surgery, children generally don't have any symptoms and lead normal lives with few, if any, restrictions. However, the surgery itself may have some long-term complications. These include the following: American Heart AssociationNational Center7272 Greenville AvenueDallas, TX 75231(800) 242-8721 American Heart Association: Tetralogy of FallotCDC: Tetralogy of Fallot tetralogy of Fallot, birth defect, congenital heart disease, cyanosis,heart defect, hypercyanosis, hypoxemia, hypoxia, tet spells, ventricular septal defect Authors and Editors Author: Alvaro Zeballos, MD, Staff Physician, Department of Emergency Medicine, Wake Med Hospital.Coauthor(s): Mike Manka, MD, Assistant Professor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Erie County Medical Center, State University of New York at Buffalo.Editors: Alan D Forker, MD, Program Director of Cardiovascular Fellowship, Professor of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Missouri at Kansas City School of Medicine; Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD, Senior Pharmacy Editor, eMedicine; Jonathan Adler, MD, Instructor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital. Tetralogy of Fallotfrom eMedicineHealth. Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.