Tinea versicolor is afungal infectionthat causes small patches of discolored spots on your skin. It's also called pityriasis versicolor. It results from a type of yeast that naturally lives on yourskin. When the yeast grows out of control, the skin disease, which appears as arash, is the result.  Acidic bleach from the growing yeast causes areas of skin to be a different color than the skin around them. These can be individual spots or patches. Specific signs and symptoms of the infection include: Patches that are white, pink, red, or brown and may be lighter or darker than the skin around them. The spots may disappear during cool weather and get worse during warm and humid weather. Similar conditions Some skin problems have symptoms that look like tinea versicolor, including: These conditions have features that clue your doctor in to what you have, such as texture and rash pattern. The yeast that causes tinea versicolor,Malassezia, grows on normal, healthy skin. But these things can trigger an overgrowth that causes the infection: Because the yeast grows naturally on your skin, tinea versicolor isn’t contagious. The condition can affect people of any skin color. It's more likely to affectteensand young adults. For some people, it can cause emotional distress and feelings of self-consciousness. Your doctor can diagnose tinea versicolor by what the rash looks like. If they need more information, these tests can help: Treatment of tinea versicolor can consist of creams, lotions, or shampoos that you put on your skin. It can also include medication given as pills. The type of treatment will depend on the size, location, and thickness of the infected area. Treatment options include: Treatment usually gets rid of thefungal infection. But skin discoloration may take several months to resolve. Episodes are very common because the yeast that causes the infection is a normal fungus that lives on your skin. You might use medicated cleansers once a week for 10 minutes at a time for a few months to help prevent tinea versicolor from coming back. You may need to use these cleansers if the infection keeps returning, especially if you live in a warm and humid area. To help you manage tinea versicolor you can: Photo Credit: Science Photo Library / Science Source SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology: "Tinea versicolor." American Osteopathic College of Dermatology: "Tinea Versicolor." Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh: "Tinea Versicolor." The Merck Manual: "Tinea Versicolor." DermNet NZ: "Pityriasis Versicolor." Clinical Knowledge Summaries, NHS: "Pityriasis Versicolor." Mayo Clinic: “Tinea Versicolor.” PLoS Pathogens: “Malassezia Fungi Are Specialized to Live on Skin and Associated with Dandruff, Eczema, and Other Skin Diseases.” StatPearls: “Tinea (Pityriasis) Versicolor.” UpToDate: “Office-based dermatologic diagnostic procedures,” “Tinea versicolor (pityriasis versicolor).” Mayo Clinic – Photo Caption Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.