This is one of several kinds of oral (mouth) cancers. Like other cancers, it happens when cells divide out of control and form a growth, or tumor. There are two types. One is called oraltongue cancerbecause it affects the part you can stick out. The other happens at the base of yourtongue, where it connects to your throat. This type, called oropharyngeal cancer,  is often diagnosed after it has spread to the lymph nodes in your neck. Tongue cancer is less common than many other types. Most people who get it are older adults. It’s rare in children. One of the first signs of tongue cancer is a lump or sore on the side of yourtonguethat doesn’t go away. It may be pinkish-red in color. Sometimes the sore will bleed if you touch or bite it.  You may also have: If you have a sore on your tongue or in yourmouththat doesn’t get better in a couple of weeks, see your doctor. If the problem is at the base of your tongue, you may not notice any symptoms. Your dentist may find signs of tongue cancer during a checkup, or your doctor might notice something during a regular exam. The human papillomavirus (HPV) can cause cancers on the base of the tongue.HPValso can infect your genital area and causecervical cancer, penile cancer, and anal cancer. It’s the most common sexually transmitted infection. There are manytypes of HPV. The ones that raise your odds of gettingcancerare called high-risk HPV. Other things that may raise your chances of getting tonguecancerinclude: Your genes also may play a role in whether you’re likely to get tonguecancer. Your doctor will examine yourmouthand ask questions about your symptoms. They may recommend an X-ray or CT (computerized tomography) scan -- several X-rays are taken from different angles and put together to show a more detailed picture. They also may take a sample of tissue from your mouth to test (abiopsy). Your treatment will depend on where your tumor is and how big it is. Surgery is often the best way to remove a tumor from the part of your tongue you can see. Your doctor will probably take out some healthy tissue and nearby lymph nodes as well, to make sure all the cancer is gone. If the cancer is on the back of your tongue, you may haveradiation therapy(X-rays and other radiation). Sometimes the best treatment is a combination ofchemotherapy, or cancer-fightingdrugs, and radiation. You might need therapy afterward to help you chew, move your tongue, swallow, and speak better. You’ll need regular checkups to make sure the cancer hasn’t come back. We know that many cases of base-of-the-tongue cancer are caused by HPV. Some things that may make you less likely to get this type of cancer are: SOURCES: American Cancer Society, “Can oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers be prevented?” Mayo Clinic, Diseases and Conditions, “Tongue Cancer.” Mount Sinai Hospital, “Tongue Cancer.” National Organization for Rare Disorders, “Tongue Cancer.” The Oral Cancer Foundation, “Facts.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.