Tongue-tie, also known asankyloglossia, is a condition some babies are born with that limits theirtonguemovements. To do its job well, yourtongueneeds to be able to reach almost every part of your mouth. That full range of motion lets you make different sounds when you speak. It also helps you swallow and sweep away bits of food to keep your mouth clean. But for babies with tongue-tie, there’s a problem with the lingual frenulum. That’s the small stretch of tissue that connects the underside of your tongue to the bottom of yourmouth. It might be too short and tight, or attached way up near the tip of the tongue. Either way, it ties the tongue in place. For some, it’s not much of an issue. For others, it can lead to problemsbreastfeeding. Later on, it can affect eating and speaking. Doctors don’t always check for it, and it’s not always easy to notice. But even if your child’spediatriciandoesn’t find it until later, it can be treated. Usually, the lingual frenulum separates from the tongue before yourbabyis born. But sometimes, it doesn’t. Doctors aren’t sure why. It may run in families. Boys are 3 times more likely to get it than girls. It’s often found because of problemsbreastfeeding. You may notice that yourbaby: Along with yourbaby’s symptoms, you may have: But tongue-tie isn’t the only reason there may be breastfeeding problems. So if you’re having them, talk to your doctor. You might also notice that yourbaby’s tongue:  Aphysical examis all it takes to see what’s going on. The doctor will: The doctor may ask older kids to move their tongue around and make certain sounds. There are two ways to take care of tongue-tie: Frenotomy.This basic procedure happens in a doctor’s office. Sometimes, you don't even need numbingdrugs. The doctor takes a pair of specially cleaned scissors and clips the frenulum, which doesn’t have many nerves or blood vessels. That means there’s not much pain. And if there’s anyblood, it’s a drop or two at most. Your baby can breastfeed right away, which can be soothing and healing. Frenuloplasty.When the frenulum is too thick for a quick snip, your pediatrician will choose this option. The doctor will: Some hospitals may use a laser instead. In that case, your child won’t need stitches. Both treatments are usually very successful and prevent any speech, dental, or eating problems. It’s rare for either one to cause issues. As with any medical procedure, though, there are risks, such as: A frenuloplasty can also lead to scarring. And your child could have a reaction to the drugs used to help them sleep. Not all doctors agree that tongue-tie needs to be treated. Some say to take care of it right away to ward off any issues. Others think it’s better to wait. That’s because it might not cause any problems or may loosen up over time. There’s no way to know for sure what’ll happen. Without treatment, it can also lead to: Talk it through with your doctor to learn what’s best for you and your baby. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Tongue-Tie (Ankyloglossia).” Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: “Ankyloglossia (Tongue-Tie).” National Health Service: “Tongue-Tie.” Victoria State Government, Better Health Channel: “Tongue-Tie.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.