Transverse myelitis is aninflammationof your spinal cord. It results from damage to nerve cells in a certain area. A fatty tissue calledmyelinprotects these nerve fibers. It fits around them like the insulation that covers an electrical wire. When myelin is damaged, the nerves underneath can be hurt, too. Once your nerves are scarred, it’s harder for them to send signals to other parts of your body the way they should. This often bringspain, weakness, orparalysis. When this happens to the nerves on both sides of part of your spinal cord, it's known as transverse myelitis. More than half the time, doctors aren't sure what causes it. But they know it can happen when your body tries to fight off a disease. Or when yourimmune systemattacks healthy cells for some reason. It’s often linked to: Autoimmune conditionslikelupusandSjogren's syndromethat causeinflammation. Infections: Multiple sclerosis(MS):Transverse myelitis can be the first sign of MS, which destroys myelin in yourbrainand spinal cord. It can also signal a relapse.  Symptoms may show up in a few hours or days (your doctor will call this an acute attack). Or you might notice them gradually over a few weeks (this is called subacute). While the condition isn’t chronic, it can come back if you have a history ofautoimmune disease. The first symptoms are usually: Once they start, symptoms can get worse within hours. Most of the time, they peak within 10 days. At that point, about half the people who get transverse myelitis lose control of their legs. Most have some numbness, tingling, or a burning sensation in their back, belly, arms, or legs. Almost all lose some bladder control. How much of your body is affected depends on which part of your spinal cord has the problem. The higher it is, the more problems you’ll have. Your doctor will run tests to figure out if you have transverse myelitis or some other condition. Magnetic resonance imaging(MRI)orcomputerized tomography (CT) scan:These tests create detailed images of your insides. They’ll show the doctor if something else is affecting your nerves, like a tumor, a slipped disk, or narrowing of the channel that holds your spinal cord. MRI can show demyelination, a sign of MS. Spinal tap:For this test, your doctor puts a needle in between two vertebrae (bones in your back) to take a sample of the fluid that surrounds yourbrainand spinal cord. If it has more disease-fighting whiteblood cellsor certain proteins than it should, you might have an infection. That may be a sign of TM. Bloodwork:Your doctor will test yourbloodfor signs of illnesses with similar symptoms, likelupus,HIV, or another form of myelitis. There's no cure, so your doctor will try to manage the disease and ease your symptoms. They may suggest: Steroids:They’ll ease inflammation in yourspine. You might get pills or have it put directly into your veins. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG):The doctor will injectantibodiesfrom healthy donors into your system. They’ll bind to your problem-causing antibodies and take them out of circulation. Plasma exchange therapy:Ifsteroidsdon’t lower your inflammation, this treatment, also called plasmapheresis, might. The doctor will replace your blood plasma (the liquid part that holds the blood cells). This might get rid of something in it that's causing yourimmune systemto attack your body and keep it from damaging other organs. Antiviralmedications:You’ll take them if your doctor thinks a virus is causing your illness. Medication for symptoms and complications:You might get drugs to relievemuscle spasms, help control your bladder or bowels, ease stiffness,manage depression, and help with sexual problems. Over-the-counter pain medicines:Acetaminophen, ibuprofen, andnaproxencan all help. Prescription pain medications:Drugs that treatdepressioncan help easenerve pain, too. You might get drugs fordepressionor drugs that stopseizures. Ventilator with a breathing tube:If your symptoms affect yourbreathing, this machine can help you breathe. It’ll make sure your body gets enough oxygen. Your doctor might also suggest: Rest:You might need to stay in bed while you fight the illness. Physical therapy:You’ll learn: Occupational therapy:This will teach you new ways to do daily chores, like cooking dinner, taking a bath, getting dressed, or cleaning the house. Psychotherapy:This will help you manage the mental effects ofanxiety,depression, sexual dysfunction, and other emotional or behavioral issues. Vocational therapy:It can help you find a job that suits your abilities or work with your employer to make changes you need. Sometimes. The most common are: Pain:It’s both a symptom and a lasting complication. Spasticity:This includes stiff, tight, and spasming muscles. It’s most common in your legs and bottom. Sexual problems:Men may have trouble getting an erection. Both genders could have trouble reachingorgasm. Depression oranxiety:Between the changes this disease makes to your body, thestressof living with it, the pain, and the sexual troubles, there’s a lot to handle. About 1,400 people a year get transverse myelitis, and about 33,000 people have some sort of disability as a result. About a third of people with transverse myelitis get better and don't have much permanent damage. They can walk normally and have only small lingering issues. Another third have problems walking. They also may have muscle spasms, a less sensitive sense of touch, or trouble controlling their bladder. Continue Reading Below The remaining third are no longer able to walk and need help with many everyday activities. Doctors don’t know why transverse myelitis affects some people more than others. They do think that the faster your symptoms show up, the harder it may be for you to recover. Early treatment and physical therapy can help. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Transverse myelitis: Diagnosis & treatment,” “Transverse myelitis: Symptoms & causes,” "Transverse Myelitis." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Transverse Myelitis Fact Sheet.” National Organization for Rare Diseases: “Transverse Myelitis.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Transverse Myelitis." National Multiple Sclerosis Society. Johns Hopkins Medicine: "What Is Transverse Myelitis?" Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Your options for managing symptoms. Ideas on how to boost your mood and self-esteem. Get personalized treatment options. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.