Trichomoniasis, also called trich, is acommon sexually transmitted disease(STD). Trichis caused by a tiny one-celledparasitenamedTrichomonas vaginalis. Anyone who’s sexually active can get it. It affects women more than men, older women more than younger ones, and African American women more than white or Hispanic women. People with trich often don’t have any symptoms, and it doesn’t usually cause problems. But if you don’t get treatment, it raises your chances of getting or spreading otherSTDs, including HIV. You get trich by havingsexwith someone who has it. Typically, it spreads through contact between apenisand avagina. Women who have sex with women can also get trich through vaginal contact. Women typically get the infection in their vulva, vagina,cervix, or urethra. Men usually get it in their urethra. They may also get it in theirprostate, the gland between thebladderand the penis. It’s rare to have trich in other parts of your body, such as your hands,mouth, oranus. Anyone who has trich can spread it, even if they don’t have symptoms. About 70% of people with trich don’t havesymptoms. In others, the signs might not show up until days or weeks after infection. Women with trichomoniasis may have: Men with trichomoniasis may have:  Doctors can diagnose trich by taking a sample of pee or fluid from your genitals and looking at it under a microscope to spot the parasite. Sometimes, they might need to do a test called a culture. This is when they store the sample for several days so the parasite can grow and be easier to find under a microscope. Sensitive tests called nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) can also spot signs of the parasite. Your doctor might test you for other STDs at the same time because many people with trich also havegonorrheaorchlamydia. Antibioticmedicationslikemetronidazole(Flagyl,Noritate, Nuvessa) andtinidazole(Tindamax) clear up the infection in most people. Your doctor will give you pills to swallow, either in one large dose or in several smaller doses. Take all of the medicine, even if you start to feel better before you’re done. Treatmentwill get rid of the parasite, but you can still get it again. About 20% of people get trich again within 3 months oftreatment. Your sex partner or partners should also be treated, even if they don’t have symptoms. Don’t have sex for 7 to 10 days after treatment. Your doctor might want to test you again before you have sex. If you don’t get treatment, trich can lead to other health problems. It can raise your risk of getting or spreading other STDs. If you haveHIV, trich may make you more likely to spread it. Because of this risk, doctors suggest that women with HIV get tested for trich at least once a year. If you’repregnant, trich may make you give birth earlier than expected. Yourbabymay have a low birth weight, which can raise the chances of health or developmental problems. It’s rare, but yourbabymay also get trich as they go through the birth canal. You can get treated for trich while pregnant, so talk to your doctor about the best options for you. The only way you can totally avoid trich is to not have vaginal sex. You can take other steps to lower your chances of getting it:  SOURCES: CDC: “Trichomoniasis -- CDC Fact Sheet.” Cleveland Clinic: “Trichomoniasis.” Medscape: “Trichomoniasis.” WomensHealth.gov: “Trichomoniasis.” Mayo Clinic: “Trichomoniasis.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Trichomoniasis.” Nemours/KidsHealth: “Trichomoniasis.” Avert: “Trichomoniasis.” LabTestsOnline: “Trichomonas Testing.”  See pictures and get the facts. 13 things that can kill your sex drive. How to stop them from spreading. What are the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.