Trichotillomania, also known as “hair-pulling disorder,” is a type of impulse control disorder. People who havetrichotillomaniahave an irresistible urge to pull out theirhair, usually from their scalp, eyelashes, and eyebrows. They know they can do damage but often can’t control the impulse. They may pull out theirhairwhen they're stressed as a way to try to soothe themselves. Trichotillomania is a type of impulse control disorder. People with these disorders know that they can do damage by acting on the impulses, but they cannot stop themselves. They may pull out theirhairwhen they're stressed as a way to try to soothe themselves. Besides repeated hair pulling, othersymptomsmay include: If you have trichotillomania, you could also have other disorders that often come with it, like onychophagia (nail biting) or skin picking disorder. Pulling fibers from blankets or hair from dolls are other signs you could have trichotillomania. Many people who have trichotillomania try to deny they have a problem and may attempt to hide theirhair lossby wearing hats, scarves, and false eyelashes and eyebrows. The exact cause of trichotillomania isn't known. It may be related to changes inbrainpathways that link areas involved in how you manage your emotions, movement, make habits, and control your impulses. Some things may boost your risk of trichotillomania, including: Trichotillomania is diagnosed based on its symptoms. There’s no specific test for it. A doctor might refer someone who has symptoms of trichotillomania to a psychiatrist orpsychologist, who can interview the person and see if they might have an impulse control disorder. Therapy Many types of therapy can support people with trichotillomania and even help them stop hair pulling completely. Medications There are no FDA-approved medicines for trichotillomania, but these drugs may control symptoms in some people: Trichotillomania can cause great distress to people who have it. Many say they feel shame and  embarrassment, and they often have low self-esteem. Other complications can include: There is no proven way to prevent trichotillomania, but getting treatment as soon as symptoms start can be a big help. Learning stress management is also a good idea, since stress often triggers hair-pulling behavior. Photo Credit (inset): Richard Usatine, MD SOURCES: Trichotillomania Learning Center. Mayo Clinic: "Trichotillomania (hair-pulling disorder)." PubMed Health: "Trichotillomania." Psycom.net: “What is Trichotillomania? A Closer Look at Hair-Pulling Disorder.” Mental Health America: “Trichotillomania (Hair Pulling).” The TLC Foundation for Body-Focused Repetitive Behaviors: “Nail Biting (Onychophagia).” Mental Health America – Photo Caption Cleveland Clinic – Photo Caption Nemours KidsHealth – Photo Caption 14 non-drug remedies that can release tension. Test your knowledge. What are your fears? Do you know how stress affects your health? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.