Type 1 diabetesis a condition in which yourimmune systemdestroysinsulin-making cells in yourpancreas. These are called beta cells. The condition is usually diagnosed inchildren and young people, so it used to be called juvenile diabetes. A condition called secondarydiabetesis liketype 1, but your beta cells are wiped out by something else, like a disease or an injury to your pancreas, rather than by your immune system. Both of these are different fromtype 2 diabetes, in which your body doesn’t respond to insulin the way it should. Signsare often subtle, but they can become severe. They include: Signs of an emergency with type 1 diabetes include: Insulin is a hormone that helps move sugar, or glucose, into your body's tissues. Your cells use it as fuel. Damage to beta cells from type 1 diabetes throws the process off. Glucose doesn’t move into your cells because insulin isn’t there to do the job. Instead, it builds up in yourblood, and your cells starve. This causes highblood sugar, which can lead to: There’s no way to prevent type 1 diabetes. Doctors don't know all the things that cause it. But they know that your genes play a role. They also know that you can gettype 1 diabeteswhen something around you, like a virus, tells your immune system to go after yourpancreas. Most people with type 1 diabetes have signs of this attack, called autoantibodies. They’re there in almost everyone who has the condition when their blood sugar is high. Type 1 diabetes can happen along with otherautoimmune diseases, like Graves’ disease or vitiligo. Only about 5% of people with diabetes have type 1. It affects males and females equally. You’re at higher risk of getting it if you: If your doctor thinks you have type 1 diabetes, they’llcheck your blood sugarlevels. They may test your urine for glucose or chemicals your body makes when you don’t have enough insulin. People who have type 1 diabetes can live long, healthy lives. You’ll need to keep a close eye on yourblood sugar levels. Your doctor will give you a range that the numbers should stay within. Adjust your insulin, food, and activities as necessary. Everyone withtype 1 diabetesneeds to use insulin shots to control their blood sugar. When your doctor talks about insulin, they’ll mention three main things: Several types of insulin are available. Your doctor may start you out with two injections a day of two types of insulin. Later, you might need more shots. Most insulin comes in a small glass bottle called a vial. You draw it out with a syringe that has a needle on the end and give yourself the shot. Some kinds come in a prefilled pen. Another kind is inhaled. You can also get it from a pump, a device you wear that sends it into your body through a small tube. Your doctor will help you pick the type and the delivery method that’s best for you. Exerciseis an important part of treating type 1. But it isn’t as simple as going for a run. Exercise affects your blood sugar levels. So you have to balance your insulin dose and the food you eat with any activity, even simple tasks around the house or yard. Knowledge is power. Check your blood sugar before, during, and after an activity to find out how it affects you. Some things will make your levels go up; others won't. You can lower your insulin or have asnackwith carbs to keep it from dropping too low. If your blood sugar is high -- above 240 mg/dL -- test for ketones, the acids that can result from high sugar levels. If they’re OK, you should be good to go. If they’re high, skip theworkout. You’ll also need to understand how food affects your blood sugar. Once you know the roles that carbs, fats, andproteinplay, you can build ahealthy eatingplan that helps keep your levels where they should be. A diabetes educator or registered dietitian can help you get started. Type 1 diabetes can lead to other problems, especially if it isn’t well-controlled. Complications include: You can take steps to keep from getting complications. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association.Diabetes Care, January 2004. Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation: "Fact Sheets: Type 1 Diabetes Facts." American Diabetes Association: "Diabetes Basics: Type 1," “Exercise and Type 1 Diabetes," “Insulin Routines,” “Insulin Basics,” “Insulin Pumps,” “Skin Complications,” “DKA (Ketoacidosis) & Ketones,” “Complications,” “Heart Disease,” “High Blood Pressure,” “Physical Activity is Important,” “Exercising with Diabetes Complications.” Joslin Diabetes Center: “The Truth About the So-Called Diabetes Diet.” Mayo Clinic: “Type 1 diabetes.” Nemours/KidsHealth: “Type 1 Diabetes: What Is It?” “Long-term Complications of Diabetes.” CDC: “Diabetes.” International Diabetes Federation: “Diabetes and cardiovascular disease.” Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynecology: “Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus and Pregnancy.” National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse: “Your Guide to Diabetes: Type 1 and Type 2,” “Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Heart and Blood Vessels Healthy,” “Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Kidneys Healthy,” “Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Feet Healthy,” “Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Mouth Healthy,” “Prevent Diabetes Problems: “Keep Your Eyes Healthy,” and “Prevent Diabetes Problems: Keep Your Diabetes under Control.” National Diabetes Education Program: “4 Steps to Manage Your Diabetes for Life.” American Heart Association: “Cholesterol Abnormalities and Diabetes.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.