Years ago, it was rare to hear about a child withtype 2 diabetes. Doctors used to think kids only got type 1. It was even calledjuvenile diabetesfor a long time. Not anymore. Now, according to the CDC, more than 208,000 people younger than 20 have diabetes. That number includes both type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Here's what you need to know if your child is diagnosed with type 2. You've probably hearddiabetesand highblood sugarmentioned together. Here's what happens. Yourdigestive systembreaks down carbohydrates into a type of sugar called glucose. Yourpancreascreates a hormone, known asinsulin, that moves glucose from yourbloodinto your cells, where it’s used for fuel. Intype 2 diabetes, the cells in your child's body don’t respond to the insulin, and glucose builds up in their bloodstream. This is called insulin resistance. Eventually, the sugar levels in their body get too high for it to handle. That could lead to other conditions in the future, likeheart disease, blindness, andkidneyfailure. Type 2 diabetesis most likely to affect kids who are: The single biggest cause of type 2 diabetes in children is extra weight. In the U.S., nearly 1 out of every 3 children are overweight. Once a child gets too heavy, they're twice as likely to get diabetes. One or more of these things may contribute to extra weight or obesity: As with adults, type 2 diabetes is more likely to affect children who carry extra weight around the middle.  At first, there may be no symptoms. Over time, you may notice: Take your child to the doctor if you notice any of these symptoms. The first step is to get your child to the doctor. They can tell if they're overweight based on their age,weight, and height. They’ll test their blood sugar to see if they have diabetes orprediabetes. If they do have diabetes, it may take a few extra steps to find out if it's type 1 or type 2. Until they know for sure, they may give them insulin. Once they confirm it's type 2 diabetes, they’ll ask you to help them make lifestyle changes. They may suggest they take a medication called metformin. It, along with liraglutide and insulin, are the only three blood sugar-lowering medicines approved for kids younger than age 18, but others are being studied. Your child should get ahemoglobin A1c testevery 3 months. This test measures their average blood sugar levels over that period. They’ll need to check their blood sugar: The doctor will teach you both how to test blood sugar and tell you how often. Most experts suggest three or more times a day if they're on insulin. If they're not, they can check less often, but should do it after meals. They can use a traditional finger stick test or a continuous glucose monitor.  To keep your child’s eating on track and blood sugar controlled: They should also getexercisefor at least 60 minutes every day. Limit their screen time at home to less than 2 hours a day. One of the best things you can do for your child is to have them take part in managing their condition. The more they do, the more confident they’ll be. Use your best judgment for what you think your child can handle. Even as they take on more responsibilities, keep an eye on things and give support when needed. At ages 3-7, they can: At ages 8-11, they may: At age 12 and up, they may: Teen years can bring new challenges. Physical changes duringpubertythat can make it harder to control blood sugar. Also, weight and body image issues may start to show up. Watch your child for emotional issues, likedepressionandanxiety, and look out for eating disorders, too. If you have concerns, talk to their doctor. You may want to considertherapy. Follow these tips to help keep your child safe and healthy at home and at school: Try to keep calm when your child makes mistakesmanaging diabetes. You need your child to feel comfortable telling you when something’s wrong instead of trying to hide it. The same steps used totreat type 2 diabetesin children can also prevent it. Reduce calories, unhealthy fats, and sweets in your child's diet. Make sure they get physical activity each day. Studies show that exercise has a dramatic effect on reducing insulin resistance. These are two important ways to help your child get down to and stay at a healthy weight andnormal blood sugar levels. Children -- especially teens -- may have a tough time making changes to prevent or manage type 2 diabetes. Here are some ways you can help: By working together, you, your child, and their diabetes health care team can be sure they remain healthy for years to come. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association: "Friends & Family: Their Responses to Your Child's Diabetes," "Teens & Young Adults."WebMD Medical News: "Obesity Doubles Kids' Risk of Diabetes: To Save Kids' Health, U.S. Must Tackle Childhood Obesity, Doctor Says."American Academy of Pediatrics.KidsHealth: “Treating Type 2 Diabetes.”Mayo Clinic: “Blood Glucose Meter: How to Choose,” “Type 2 Diabetes in Children.”HealthyChildren.org: “Type 2 Diabetes: Tips for Healthy Living.”Hormone Health Network: “Type 2 Diabetes in Children.”American Diabetes Association: “Food and Fun,” “Back-to-School Tips,” “Serious Lows,” “Communicating with Your Child.”National Diabetes Services Scheme: “What Should I Eat?”Texas Children’s Hospital: “Your child has type 2 diabetes: What’s a parent to do?”Children’s of Alabama: “Age Related Guidelines for Diabetes.”CDC: “Managing Diabetes at School Playbook.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.