Type 2 diabetesis a lifelong disease that keeps your body from usinginsulinthe way it should. People with type 2 diabetes are said to have insulin resistance. People who are middle-aged or older are most likely to get this kind of diabetes. It used to be called adult-onset diabetes. But type 2 diabetes also affects kids andteens, mainly because ofchildhood obesity. Type 2 is the most common type ofdiabetes. There are about 29 million people in the U.S. with type 2. Another 84 million haveprediabetes, meaning theirblood sugar(or blood glucose) is high but not high enough to be diabetes yet. The symptoms oftype 2 diabetescan be so mild that you don't notice them. About 8 million people who have it don't know it. Symptoms include: If you have darkrashesaround your neck or armpits, see your doctor. These are calledacanthosis nigricans, and they can be signs that your body is becoming resistant to insulin. Yourpancreasmakes a hormone called insulin. It helps your cells turn glucose, a type of sugar, from the food you eat into energy. People with type 2 diabetes make insulin, but their cells don't use it as well as they should. At first, yourpancreasmakes more insulin to try to get glucose into your cells. But eventually, it can't keep up, and the glucose builds up in yourbloodinstead. Usually, a combination of thingscauses type 2 diabetes. They might include: Certain things make it more likely that you’ll get type 2 diabetes. The more of these that apply to you, the higher your chances of getting it are. Some things are related to who you are: Risk factors related to your health and medical history include: Other things that raise yourrisk of diabeteshave to do with your daily habits and lifestyle. These are the ones you can do something about: Your doctor can test your blood for signs of type 2 diabetes. Usually, they’ll test you on 2 days to confirm the diagnosis. But if your blood glucose is very high or you have many symptoms, one test may be all you need. Managing type 2 diabetes includes a mix of lifestyle changes and medication. Lifestyle changes You may be able to reach your targetblood sugar levelswith diet and exercise alone. Medication If lifestyle changes don’t get you to your target blood sugar levels, you may needmedication. Some of the most common for type 2 diabetes include: Even if you change your lifestyle and take your medicine as directed, your blood sugar may still get worse over time. That doesn’t mean you’ve done something wrong. Diabetes is progressive, and many people eventually need more than one drug. When you take more than one drug to control your type 2 diabetes, that’s called combination therapy. You and your doctor should work together to find the best mix for you. Usually, you'll keep taking metformin and add something else. What that is may depend on your situation. Some drugs control blood sugar spikes (your doctor may call thishyperglycemia) that come right after meals, for instance. Others are more effective at stopping drops in blood sugar (hypoglycemia) between meals. Some may help with weight loss or cholesterol, as well as your diabetes. You and your doctor should talk about any possible side effects. Cost may be an issue as well. If you take medication for something else, that will need to be factored into any decision. You’ll need to see your doctor more often when you start taking a new combination of drugs. You might find that adding a second drug doesn’t bring your blood sugar under control. Or the combination of two drugs might work only for a short time. If that happens, your doctor might consider a third non-insulin drug, or you may start insulin therapy. Adopting a healthy lifestyle can help you lower yourrisk of diabetes. Over time, high blood sugar can damage and cause problems with your: The best way to avoid these complications is to manage your type 2 diabetes well. There are many medical professionals who can help you live well with diabetes, including: If you were recently diagnosed with type 2 diabetes, ask your doctor these questions at your next visit. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association: "Statistics About Diabetes," "Type 1 Diabetes," "Type 2," "Diagnosing Diabetes and Learning About Prediabetes," “Anatomy of a Test Strip.” U.S. National Library of Medicine: "Diabetes in Children and Teens." Cleveland Clinic: "Diabetes Learning Module," "Preventing Diabetes Complications." National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse: "Causes of Diabetes." International Diabetes Federation: "Prevention," "Complications of Diabetes." Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health: "Simple Steps to Preventing Diabetes." National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: "Am I at risk for type 2 diabetes?" Joslin Diabetes Center: "Common Questions About Type 2 Diabetes," “Little Things that Can Have a Big Impact on your Blood Glucose Reading,” “Money Saving Strategies for Diabetes Care Supplies.” Carolinas HealthCare System: "Yeast Infections and Diabetes: What You Should Know." Mayo Clinic: “Type 2 diabetes,” "Blood sugar testing: Why, when and how,” “Blood glucose monitors: What factors affect accuracy?" LiverTox: “Second Generation Sulfonylureas.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Type 2 Diabetes.” Harvard Medical School: “Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.” International Diabetes Federation: “Type 2 diabetes.” CDC: “Diabetes.” NHS Inform: “Type 2 diabetes.” American Diabetes Association: “Skin Complications,” “Diabetes and Hearing Loss.” Alzheimer’s Association: “Alzheimer’s disease and type 2 diabetes: A growing connection.” UpToDate: “Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors for the treatment of hyperglycemia in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care: "Investigation of the Accuracy of 18 Marketed Blood Glucose Monitors.” Diatribe.org: “FDA Publishes Final Recommendations on Blood Glucose Meter Accuracy.” Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology: "Lot-to-lot variability of test strips and accuracy assessment of systems for self-monitoring of blood glucose according to ISO 15197.” MIT School of Engineering: "How do glucometers work?” National Institute of Mental Health: "Depression." American Diabetes Association: "Depression." National  Institutes of Health: "Coping with Chronic Illness." Science Daily: "Diabetes and Depression Can Be A Fatal Mix." Medscape: “Pharmacologic Therapy for Depression.” Mayo Clinic: “Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),” “Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs).” Chau, D.Clinical Diabetes, 2001. American Diabetes Association: “Diabetes 101,” “Living Healthy With Diabetes,” “Peripheral Arterial Disease (PAD).” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Diabetes: What You Need to Know As You Age.” American Geriatrics Society's Health in Aging Foundation: “Diabetes.” The Fisher Center for Alzheimer's Research Foundation: “Low Blood Sugar May Trigger Dementia in Those With Diabetes.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Tips for Older Adults With Diabetes.” Cleveland Clinic: “Five Best Exercises for People With Diabetes.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.