Syphilisis acommon sexually transmitted disease(STD). It’s easily cured but can be serious if it’s not treated. ThisSTDdevelops in four stages. Symptoms in the first two can be so mild that you might not notice them. One stage -- latent syphilis -- doesn’t have symptoms. The other three phases have distinct symptoms. They develop as follows: Primary Secondary These symptoms will go away, even if you don’t get treated. But if you’re not treated, your infection will get worse. Latent During this phase, the syphilis bacteria are still alive in your body, but you have no signs or symptoms of the infection. You’re not contagious during this stage, but syphilis may still affect yourheart,brain, nerves, bones, and other parts of your body. This phase can last for years. Not everyone who has syphilis will enter this phase of the infection. Some people will go into the tertiary stage. Tertiary (Late) This stage begins when symptoms from the secondary stage disappear. Syphilis isn’t contagious at this point, but the infection has started to affect your organs. This can lead to death. Symptoms of tertiary syphilis may include: If you have syphilis, you can spread it during the first two stages and the early latent stage to someone you havesexwith. If your partner touches a chancre or your rash, they can get the infection. It can enter the body through the genitals,mouthor broken skin. Pregnant women infected with syphilis can pass it on to their baby. Even if the chancre is hidden inside yourvaginaor rectum, you can still spread syphilis. To lower your risk of catching thisSTD, always usecondomsduringsex. If you think there’s a chance you or your partner has it, get tested and treated. SOURCES: CDC: “Syphilis -- CDC Fact Sheet.” Southern Nevada Health District: “Syphilis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Syphilis.” Mayo Clinic: “Syphilis.” See pictures and get the facts. 13 things that can kill your sex drive. How to stop them from spreading. What are the symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.