Type 2 diabetes is a disease in which your body doesn’t make enough of a hormone called insulin or doesn’t use insulin the way it should. Insulin helps carry glucose (also called sugar) to your cells. So when there’s a problem with the insulin, glucose builds up in your blood. You’ve probably heard this called high blood sugar. About 90% of people who have diabetes have type 2. The other two main ones are type 1, in which your body stops making insulin, and gestational, which happens in pregnant women. You can usually control type 2 diabetes with lifestyle changes. Some people also need medication. You might not know that you have type 2 diabetes until it affects your health. About 1 in 4 people with the condition don’t know that they have it. Symptoms can come on slowly. They may include: It’s important to get yourblood sugar under controlto avoid these serious conditions: Over time, people with type 2 diabetes may have other health problems: Type 2 was once called adult-onsetdiabetesbecause it was rare in children and teens. But it has become more common since the mid-1990s, in large part because more young people are overweight or obese, a risk factor for the disease. Children are also at higher risk of type 2 diabetes if they don’t get enough exercise or if they have a close relative with the condition. African American, Hispanic, Native American, Alaska Native, Asian American, and Pacific Islander children are more likely to get it. Your risk of type 2 diabetes goes up as you age because your body can become resistant toinsulinand your pancreas might not work as well as it used to. Diabetes is more likely to cause complications in people 65 and older, especially heart attacks, eye problems, loss of a leg (amputation), and kidney disease. Let them know if you have any of the common symptoms of type 2 diabetes or if you have questions about type 2 diabetes. It's important to get tested and start treatment early to prevent serious complications. SOURCES: American Diabetes Association: "Diabetes Symptoms," “Eye Complications,” “Diabetes and Hearing Loss,” “Kidney Disease (Nephropathy),” “Skin Complications.” American College of Endocrinology: "Position statement on inpatient diabetes and metabolic control." Physicians Desk Reference (PDR Health): ''Diabetes - Type 2 Symptoms.'' Mayo Clinic: “Diabetes symptoms: When diabetes symptoms are a concern,” “Diabetic hypoglycemia,” “Diabetic neuropathy,” “Hyperglycemia in diabetes,” “Type 2 diabetes.” Annals of Medical and Health Sciences Research: “Xerostomia Due to Systemic Disease: A Review of 20 Conditions and Mechanisms.” Evidence-Based Diabetes Management: “The Persistent Complication of Hypoglycemia in Diabetics.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Diabetes, Heart Disease, and Stroke,” “Type 2 Diabetes.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Diabetes and High Blood Pressure.” CDC: “Diabetes.” World Journal of Diabetes: “Type 2 diabetes mellitus in children and adolescents.” Texas Department of State Health Services: “Diabetes in Children.” Diabetes Care: “Diabetes in Older Adults.” UpToDate: “Treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the older patient.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.