Tonsillitis is an infection of your tonsils, two masses of tissue at the back of your throat. Yourtonsilsact as filters, trapping germs that could otherwise enter your airways and cause infection. They also make antibodies to fight infection. But sometimes, they get overwhelmed by bacteria or viruses. This can make them swollen and inflamed. Tonsillitis is common, especially in children. It can happen once in a while or come back again and again in a short period. There are three types: The main symptoms of tonsillitis are inflamed and swollen tonsils, sometimes severe enough to make it hard tobreathethrough your mouth. Other symptoms include: In children, symptoms may also include: Bacterial andviral infectionscause tonsillitis. A common cause isStreptococcus(strep) bacteria, which can also cause strep throat. Other common causes include: Some things may put you at greater risk of getting tonsillitis: Your doctor will do a physical exam. They’ll look at your tonsils to see if they’re red or swollen or have pus on them. They’ll also check for a fever. They may look in your ears and nose for signs of infection and feel the sides of your neck for swelling and pain. You might need tests to find the cause of your tonsillitis. They include: Complications usually happen only if bacteria caused your infection. They include: If you have strep bacteria and don’t get treatment, your illness could lead to a more serious problem, including: Your treatment will depend in part on what caused your illness. Medication If your tests find bacteria, you’ll getantibiotics. Your doctor might give you these drugs in a one-time injection or in pills that you’ll swallow for several days. You’ll start to feel better within 2 or 3 days, but it’s important to take all of your medication. Home remedies If you have a virus, antibiotics won't help, and your body will fight the infection on its own. In the meantime, you can try some home remedies: Tonsillectomy surgery Tonsils are an important part of your immune system, so your doctor will try to help you keep them. But if your tonsillitis keeps coming back or won’t go away, or if swollen tonsils make it hard for you to breathe or eat, you might need to have your tonsils taken out. This surgery is called tonsillectomy. Tonsillectomy used to be a very common treatment. But now, doctors only recommend it if tonsillitis keeps coming back. That means you or your child has tonsillitis more than seven times in one year, more than four or five times a year for the past two years, or more than three times a year for the past three years. Usually, your doctor uses a sharp tool called a scalpel to take out your tonsils. But other options are available, including lasers, radio waves, ultrasonic energy, or electrocautery to remove enlarged tonsils. Discuss your options with your doctor to decide the best treatment for you. Tonsillectomy recovery Tonsillectomy is an outpatient procedure, meaning you won’t need to stay in the hospital. It usually lasts less than an hour. You can probably go home a few hours after surgery. Recovery usually takes 7 to 10 days. You may have some pain in your throat, ears, jaw, or neck after the surgery. Your doctor can tell you what drugs to take to help with this. Get plenty of rest and drink lots of fluids while you’re recovering. But don’t eat or drink any dairy products for the first 24 hours. You might have a low fever and see a little blood in your nose or mouth for several days after the surgery. If your fever is over 102 or you have bright red blood in your nose or mouth, call your doctor right away. The best way to prevent tonsillitis is through good hygiene, including: SOURCES: Kliegman R.M., Behrman R.E., Jenson H.B., Stanton B.F., eds.,Nelson Textbook of Pediatrics,18th ed., Philadelphia, Saunders Elsevier, 2007. American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery: "Tonsils and Adenoids." Nemours Foundation: "Tonsillitis." University of Virginia Health System: "Tonsillitis." American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery: "Fact Sheet: Tonsillectomy Procedures," "Fact Sheet: Fact Sheet: Tonsils and Adenoids PostOp." University of Texas Health Science Center: “Tonsillitis.” Journal of Inflammation Research: “Chronic tonsillitis and biofilms: a brief review of treatment modalities.” Mayo Clinic: “Tonsillitis.” Cooper University Health Care: “Tonsillitis in Adults.” Children’s Hospital Los Angeles: “Tonsillitis and How to Know When Your Child Has It.” Cleveland Clinic: “Tonsillitis.” NHS Inform: “Tonsillitis.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Tonsillitis.”  Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.