Encephalitis, or inflammation of thebraintissue, is rare, affecting about one in 200,000 people each year in the U.S. When it strikes, it can be very serious, causing personality changes,seizures, weakness, and other symptoms depending on the part of thebrainaffected. Children, the elderly, and those with a weak immune system are most vulnerable. The disease is usually caused by one of several viral infections, so it's sometimes referred to as viral encephalitis. Most people who have mild encephalitis fully recover. The most appropriate treatment and the patient's chance of recovery depend on the virus involved and the severity of the inflammation. In acute encephalitis, the infection directly affects thebraincells. In para-infectious encephalitis, thebrainand spinal cord become inflamed within one to two weeks of contracting a viral orbacterial infection.   Viral encephalitis may develop during or after infection with any of several viral illnesses includinginfluenza,herpes simplex,measles, mumps, rubella, rabies, chickenpox, and arbovirus infection includingWest Nile virus. Herpes simplextype 1 virus is one of the more common and serious causes of viral encephalitis. Herpes-related encephalitis can erupt rapidly, and may cause seizures or mental changes and even lead tocomaor death. It occurs when the herpes simplex type 1 virus travels to the brain rather than moving through the body to the surface of theskinand producing its more common symptom, acold sore. Early recognition and treatment ofherpes encephalitiscan be life-saving. You are not more likely to get encephalitis if you havecold sores. Arbovirus encephalitis is another form of viral encephalitis. It is caused by various viruses that are carried by insects (such as mosquitoes and ticks). Unlikeherpes, arboviral infections are seasonal, occurring primarily in summer and early fall, and are clustered in specific regions, such as in the case of St. Louis encephalitis. In rare instances, bacterial, fungal, parasitic, or rickettsial infections cause encephalitis.Canceror even exposure to certain drugs or toxins may also cause encephalitis. The symptoms ofencephalitisare usually sudden and severe. They include: Seek medical attention right away if you or someone else has any of these symptoms. Many clues as to the cause ofencephalitiscome from an exposure history. Because a person with encephalitis is usually disoriented, family and friends are key to getting a good history. It is important to know if the person may have come into contact withmosquitoesorticks, infected animals, or sick people. Your doctor may also order anMRIscan,spinal tap, or electroencephalogram (EEG). Bloodtests to check for bacteria or viruses and the immune cells produced in response to them can also be helpful. Rarely, an analysis of abraintissue sample (biopsy) may be necessary to confirm the diagnosis in cases where symptoms are getting worse and treatments aren't working. It can be very important to identify the type ofencephalitisin order to give the right treatment. Because complications from encephalitis can be serious, the condition requires hospitalization. Treatment will depend largely on your age and condition, as well as the form and cause of the disease. If encephalitis is caused by abacterial infection, it can be treated with intravenousantibiotics. Treatment forherpes-related encephalitis includes supportive care, as well as intravenous antiviral therapy with a drug such asacyclovir. Other treatments may be used to lowerfever, providehydration, treatseizuresif they develop, and reduce any pressure in the skull. With proper care, most people recover from encephalitis. Infants and elderly people are at greater risk of permanentbrain damage. The elimination ofsmallpoxand the use of vaccines againstmumps,measles, and rubella have lowered cases ofencephalitis, especially in children. Vaccineshave been developed for people who travel to high-risk areas as well. Other ways to prevent it are to avoid viruses that can lead to the disease (likeherpes) and to protect yourself against mosquito and tick bites. SOURCES: The Mayo Clinic. Nemours Foundation. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.