A ''blackeye'' is abruiseto the eyelidskincaused by blunt trauma to theeyeregion. It may also involve broken blood vessels in the white of the eye itself, called asubconjunctival hemorrhage. Like manybruises, a "shiner" is usually nothing to worry about and will disappear in 1-2 weeks. In some cases, however, a black eye is a warning sign of more serious injury to the eye or to the skull. Any damage to the eyeball that causes it to become red and swollen must be promptly evaluated by a doctor or an eye specialist. Blunt force eye injuries, as occurs in fighting, competitive sports, and ordinary accidents, could involve an unsuspecteddetached retina,internal bleeding, or other serious problems. An orbital fracture involving one of the five delicate bones around the eye may trap an eye muscle or soft tissues. A fracture could also damage the optic nerve and permanently damage eyesight. If so, you may need emergency surgery to correct the condition. The signs of a blackeyeinclude bruising and swelling of the eyelid and soft tissue around the injuredeye. The discoloration starts out deep purple or blue; then, it may turn green or yellow before disappearing, usually in about a week. If you also have a subconjunctival hemorrhage, all or part of the white of your eye will turn bright red. Usually, this isn't painful and clears up in about 2 weeks. Most black eyes are the result of blunt trauma that causes bleeding beneath the thin eyelid skin, producing the characteristic black and blue discoloration. A fracture deep inside the skull can also blacken both eyes in what they call "raccoon eyes" although the eye area itself was not injured. People withsinusitisfromallergiessometimes get "allergic shiners"—darkening under the eyes caused by inflamed and engorgedbloodvessels—but this is not the same thing as a black eye, which is caused by an injury. See a doctor for a black eye if: Any of the symptoms below may indicate damage to the eyeball, which should be evaluated and treated by an eye care specialist: Photo Credit: Bryan Steffy/Getty Images SOURCES:James B., Chew C., Bron A. "Trauma,"Lecture Notes on Ophthalmology, Blackwell Publishing, 2003. American Academy of Ophthalmology. UpToDate. American Academy of Ophthalmology: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage Causes,” “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage Treatment,” “What Is a Subconjunctival Hemorrhage?” Mayo Clinic: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage (broken blood vessel in eye): Diagnosis,” “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage (broken blood vessel in eye): Overview.” Clinical Ophthalmology: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage: Risk Factors and Potential Indicators.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage.” KidsHealth: “A to Z: Subconjunctival Hemorrhage.” Cedars-Sinai: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage.” StatPearls: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage.” Cleveland Clinic: “Subconjunctival Hemorrhage.” Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.