Screening for early detection of primaryliver canceris not performed routinely, but it may be considered for people at high risk for the disease. However, studies haven't determined if screening is beneficial for people who are not at increased risk. To diagnoseliver cancer, a doctor must rule out other causes ofliverdysfunction. Patients at high risk include patients with a condition called hemochromatosis, chronic hepatitis, and alcoholics. Additional tests include: Any liver cancer is difficult to cure. Primary livercanceris rarely detectable early, when it is most treatable. Secondary or metastatic livercanceris hard to treat because it has already spread. The liver's complex network of blood vessels and bile ducts makes surgery difficult. Most treatment concentrates on making patients feel better and perhapslive longer. Patients with early-stage tumors that can be removed surgically have the best chance of long-term survival. Unfortunately, most liver cancers are inoperable at the time it's diagnosed, either because the cancer is too advanced or the liver is too diseased to permit surgery. In some patients,chemotherapyis given directly into the liver (chemoembolization) to reduce tumors to a size that may make surgery possible. This may also be done withoutchemotherapy(bland embolization) in some cases, using ethanol instead. Patients in remission must be monitored closely for potential recurrence. Cryotherapy, or freezing the tumor, and radiofrequency ablation (RFA), using radio waves to destroy the tumor, may be used to treat some cases of liver cancer.Radiation therapycan be given in various ways, but has its limitations due to the liver's low tolerance to radiation. When used, the role of radiation is to alleviate symptoms outside of the liver or to relieve pain within the liver by shrinking the tumor.Radioembolizationtherapy uses substances to cut off the blood supply to the tumor. Aliver transplantmay be an option for those with both liver cancer and cirrhosis. Although this procedure is risky, it offers some chance of long-term survival. Advanced liver cancer has no standard curative treatment. Chemotherapy and low-dose radiation may control the cancer's spread and ease pain, however these are of modest benefit in this type of cancer. Most patients receive painkillingmedicationalong with drugs to relievenausea, improve appetite, and reduce abdominal or lower body swelling. The drugsorafenib(Nexavar) andregorafenib(Stivarga) are targeted drugs that can improve the overall survival with advanced liver cancer. In addition,lenvatinib(Lenvima),nivolumab(Opdivo), and the combination ofatezolizumab(Tecentriq) plusbevacizumab(Avastin,Mvasi,Zirabevcan) can also be used to treat advanced liver cancer. People with advanced liver cancer may choose to joinclinical trialstesting new approaches to treatment. SOURCES: The Mayo Clinic. American Cancer Society. Allegheny General Hospital Liver Cancer Network. What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.