They’re itchy and uncomfortable, and no one really likes to talk about them. Butvaginal yeast infectionsare very common in women. It’s estimated that 75% of women will have at least one yeast infection in their lifetime. Thoughyeast infectionscan happen to anyone at any time, there are certain things that make getting them more likely. Most infections can be cleared up quickly and easily. Thevaginanormally contains a healthy balance of bacteria and yeast. Thehormoneestrogenhelps bacteria calledlactobacillito grow. These bacteria kill harmful organisms in thevaginaand keep you healthy. But when something happens to tip that balance, afunguscalled candida can grow out of control and cause ayeast infection. Itchiness and discomfort are the main symptoms of a yeast infection, but there are others. You may also experience any or all of the following: If you think you have a yeast infection, see your doctor before treating yourself. The symptoms of yeast infections are similar to other, more serious conditions, including sexually transmitted infections andbacterial vaginosis(bacterial overgrowth in the vagina). An accurate diagnosis is important so you can get the best treatment. There are many reasons you could get ayeast infection, including: Over-the-counter antifungal creams, ointments orsuppositories(withclotrimazoleormiconazole) are the most common ways to treat yeast infections. These can take from 1 to 7 days. Your doctor may also choose to prescribe an oral antifungal medication, such as fluconazole(Diflucan) oribrexafungerp(Brexafemme). If you’re pregnant, it’s safe to use creams or suppositories but avoid oral medications. It’s important for you to know that some yeast infection medications weakencondomsor diaphragms. That makes it easier for you toget pregnantor contract asexually transmitted disease. Be sure to read instructions and warnings before using. If you have diabetes or a weakened immune system, you may get yeast infections over and over again. It’s a condition called recurrent vulvovaginal candidiasis (RVVC). If you get yeast infections at least four times a year, your doctor may recommend that you take a weekly fluconazole pill for 6 months to fight them.Oteseconazole(Vivjoa) has been approved for those with recurring problems with infections who will not be reproducing. Some studies have shown that eating probiotic yogurt or takingLactobacillusacidophilussupplementsmay slow the growth of yeast in the vagina, lowering the risk for infections. But more research is needed before a clear connection can be made. SOURCES: CDC: "2010 STD Treatment Guidelines." American Congress of Gynecologist and Obstetricians: “Vulvovaginal Health.” WomensHealth.gov: “Vaginal Yeast Infections.” Mycopathologia:“Impact of eating probiotic yogurt on colonization by Candida species of the oral and vaginal mucosa in HIV-infected and HIV-uninfected women.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.