Scarlet fever is a bacterial infection that causes a bright redrash. Itlooks and feels like sandpaper. Also called scarlatina, the infection is easily spread from person to person. It gets its name from the red, bumpy rash that typically covers the body. Scarlet fever starts out looking like asunburn. Most often, the rash begins on the face and neck and spreads to the rest of the body. It may itch. Other signs you or your child may have scarlet fever include: Fever, with or without chills Sore, red throat that may have white blotches Swollen glands in the neck Headache or body aches Nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain Red, swollen tongue that may be bumpy or have a whitish coating Flushed face with pale ring around the mouth Deep red coloring in the creases of the arms, legs, neck and groin After the rash goes away, your skin may peel for several weeks. If your child hasstrep throat, there's a chance they will also develop scarlet fever. The same bacteria that causes scarlet fever causes strep throat. It's called "group A strep." Scarletfevercan also be linked toburnsor wounds that become infected -- your own or the infected wounds of another person. Anyone can get scarlet fever, but it's most common in kids from 5 to 15 years old. The infection is often passed between classmates at school or family members who are in close contact with each other. It's most often spread by contact with the droplets emitted when an infected personcoughsor sneezes. It can even be spread if you touch something -- like a plate or glass – on which these droplets have landed. Call your doctor if your child has asore throat, especially if they also have a rash or afever. Your doctor will run the following tests to check for scarlet fever: Physical exam. A doctor will take a look at the rash and throat, and see if the lymph nodes are swollen. They'll also look for other symptoms like chills, fever, and body ache. They’ll ask whether your child hasnausea,vomiting, or no appetite. Throat swab. To confirm whether scarlet fever or strep throat is causing the symptoms, they’ll swab the throat and tonsils to test for the group A strep bacteria. Rapid strep test. A rapid test will give results before you leave the office. If that’s negative, the doctor may order a culture, a more in-depth test to see if the bacteria is actually present. It's important to test for strep because other illnesses can cause the same symptoms. They may have different treatments. Typically, the treatment for scarlet fever is the same as for strep throat. Antibiotics will clear up scarlet fever by killing the strep bacteria that cause it. It may take a couple of weeks to get back to normal. Be sure to let day care providers and classmates know that they may have been exposed. In the meantime, these are some things you can do to make yourself or your child more comfortable: It’s important to get treatment to prevent possible complications. The bacteria can spread throughout the body and cause other infections, including pneumonia. In rare cases, it can lead to rheumatic fever, a serious disease affecting the heart, joints and nervous system. SOURCES: HealthyChildren.org: "Scarlet Fever." Children's Hospital of Philadelphia: "Scarlet Fever." KidsHealth: "Scarlet Fever." Boston Children's Hospital: "Scarlet Fever in Children." CDC: "Scarlet Fever: A Group A Streptococcal Infection,"“Scarlet Fever: All You Need to Know.” Mayo Clinic: "Scarlet Fever Definition," "Scarlet Fever Risk Factors," "Scarlet Fever Causes," “Scarlet Fever,” "Scarlet Fever Treatments and Drugs," "Scarlet Fever Lifestyle and Home Remedies." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.