To diagnose anemia, your doctor will likely ask you about your medical history, perform aphysical exam, and order blood tests. You can help by providing detailed answers about your symptoms, family medical history, diet,medicationsyou take, alcohol intake, and ethnic background. Your doctor will look forsymptoms of anemiaand other physical clues that might point to a cause. There are basically three different causes ofanemia: blood loss, decreased or faulty red blood cell production, or destruction of redblood cells. Blood tests will not only confirm the diagnosis ofanemia, but also help point to the underlying condition. Tests might include: Only in rare cases will a doctor need to remove a sample of bone marrow to determine the cause of your anemia. Your doctor may not treat your anemia until the underlying cause has been established. The treatment for one type of anemia may be both inappropriate and dangerous for another type of anemia. Anemia Caused by Blood LossIf you suddenly lose a large volume of blood, you may be treated with fluids, a blood transfusion, oxygen, and possibly iron to help your body build new red blood cells. Chronic blood loss is treated by identifying the source of bleeding, stopping the bleeding, and, if necessary, providing treatment for iron-deficiency anemia. Anemia Caused by Decreased Red Blood Cell ProductionThe type of treatment you receive depends on the cause of decreased red blood cell production. Anemia Caused byIron DeficiencyWithout adequate iron, the body is unable to produce normal red blood cells. In young women, iron deficiency anemia can result from heavy menstrual bleeding. Non-menstruating women or men who develop iron deficiency need to have acolonexam (colonoscopyorbarium enema) to help identify the source of chronic bleeding. With iron deficiency anemia, your doctor will probably recommendiron supplementsthat contain the ferrous form of iron. Timed-release iron supplements arenota good choice for most people, because iron is primarily absorbed in the upper part of the digestive tract. If you use iron supplements, remember the following cautions: Your doctor may also recommend that you increase the amount of iron in your diet. Good dietary sources of iron include red meat, beans, egg yolk, whole-grain products, nuts, and seafood. Many processed foods and milk are also reinforced with iron. Your doctor will monitor your red blood cell counts, including hematocrit, hemoglobin, and ferritin levels, during treatment. If your anemia doesn't improve with iron supplements, your doctor will look for some other underlying cause. In rare cases, your doctor may prescribe iron injections or give you iron intravenously (through a needle in the vein). In extremely rare cases of life-threatening iron-deficiency anemia, treatment may involve a blood transfusion. Anemia Caused By Vitamin B12 and Folate Deficiency Treatment depends on the cause of the deficiency. If your body stores are depleted ofvitamin B12, your doctor will most likely prescribe vitamin B12 injections. Vitamin B12 can also be given bymouth, but very high doses are needed. Vitamin B12 can also been given under thetongueor in a nasal spray, but these preparations are expensive and have not been adequately studied to be recommended. There is a good chance that many of the symptoms of deficiency will improve once the body is provided with the needed B12. Some people with vitamin B12 deficiency have a permanent inability to absorb vitamin B12 and will need injections every one to three months or pills daily for the rest of their lives. Some forms ofgastric bypass surgeryare associated with deficiencies of iron, vitamin B12, and othernutrientstypically absorbed in the part of thestomachthat is bypassed. Your doctor may also recommend that you increase the amount of vitamin B12 in your diet. Good dietary sources of vitamin B12 are meat,liver, andkidney; fish, oysters, and clams; and milk, cheese, and eggs. If you have a folate deficiency (which is rare), your doctor will prescribe folic acid supplements (folic acid is a form of folate used in dietary supplements and fortified foods.) They may recommend you to increase the amount of folate in your diet. Good dietary sources of folate include fresh fruits, green leafy vegetables, and cruciferous vegetables (cauliflower, broccoli, and Brussels sprouts); dairy products; and whole grain cereals. Vegetables should be eaten raw or lightly cooked. Anemia Caused by Problems of the Bone Marrow andStem Cells. This anemia tends to be more persistent and difficult to treat.The treatments for hereditary anemias, such as thalassemia orsickle cell disease, vary widely and depend on the specific condition and the severity of symptoms. Some anemias will not require any treatment, while others may require repeated transfusions and other aggressive measures. Althoughaplastic anemiawill occasionally go into spontaneous remission, some people with this disorder require bone marrow transplantation. Anemia Caused by Chronic Disease It is best to treat the underlying condition whenever possible. Anemia caused by chronic kidney disease or followingchemotherapycan often be treated with an injection of recombinant human erythropoietin calleddarbepoetin alfa(Aranesp).orepoetin alpha(Epogen,Procrit). Erythropoietin is ahormonethat stimulates the production of red blood cells in the bone marrow. Darbepoetin alfa is a synthetic form of erythropoietin. Anemia Caused by Increased Red Blood Cell DestructionThe treatment of hemolytic anemia will be tailored to the underlying cause. Mild cases of hemolytic anemia may not require any treatment at all. If an offending environmental agent can be identified -- a chemical, for example -- exposure to this agent should stop immediately. Other people with hemolytic anemia may need surgery to replace faultyheartvalves, remove a tumor, or repair abnormal blood vessels. Supportive treatment -- like intravenous fluids and pain medication -- will often be given. A blood transfusion may be necessary in some cases. Steroids can halt the body's immune attack on its own red blood cells. Certain damaging factors can be removed from the blood by a treatment calledplasmapheresis. If hemolytic anemia persists despite treatment, your doctor may recommendsplenectomy-- surgical removal of thespleen-- as a last resort. Most people can lead a normal life without their spleen. Longstanding hemolytic anemia can causegallstonesto develop from the by-products of red blood cell destruction.Gallbladder surgerymay be necessary for symptomatic gallstones. A type of hemolytic anemia that occurs more commonly in children is associated with kidney damage, anddialysismay be necessary. In extremely rare cases, bone marrow transplantation may be the only solution for certain types of hemolytic anemia. Sickle Cell AnemiaOccasionally, children with sickle cell disease who have an appropriate donor may be cured by abone marrow transplant. Alternatively, a drug calledhydroxyurea(Droxia,Hydrea,Silkos) appears to stimulate the formation of an alternate form of hemoglobin that isn't susceptible to the sickling, and may be used to reduce the frequency of bone pain. The bone pain can usually be eased with pain medications and the anemia may require transfusions. Hydroxyurea may also decrease the need for blood transfusions. Lead poisoningis treated by discontinuing exposure to lead and administering a drug that binds and draws lead out of the body. You can help prevent iron-deficiency anemia by eating a well-balanced diet that includes good sources of iron, vitamin B12, and folate. Steps to take include the following:  SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians. The American Medical Athletic Association. Albemarle Pulmonary Medical Associates, PA.Gary W. Tamkin, MD, Attending Physician, Highland General Hospital -- Alameda County Medical Center, Oakland. Cornell University Department of Animal Science. CDC. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.