Agoiteris an enlargement of yourthyroid gland. That's the gland at the front of your neck just below your Adam's apple. It may be a temporary problem that will get better without treatment. Or it can be a symptom of another, possibly serious, thyroid condition that requires medical attention.   Since many things can make your thyroid swell, there are lots of types of goiters. A few of them are: Simple goiters, which happen when your thyroid gland doesn't make enough hormones. The thyroid grows larger to make up for this. Endemic goiters.Sometimes called colloid goiters, these are caused by a lack of iodine in yourdiet. Your thyroid uses iodine to make its hormones. Few people get this kind of goiter in countries where iodine is added to table salt, like the United States. Sporadic or nontoxic goiters, which usually have no known cause. Certain drugs and medical conditions can trigger them. Multinodular goiters, which happen when lumps called nodules grow in your thyroid. A goiter is described as "toxic" when it's linked tohyperthyroidism. That means your thyroid makes too much thyroidhormone. A "nontoxic" goiter doesn't cause ether hyperthyroidism orhypothyroidism(not enough thyroid hormone). The symptoms of agoiterinclude swelling at the front base of the neck, ranging from a small lump or multiple nodules to a general enlargement on one or both sides of your neck. You may also have: If you have a toxic goiter with hyperthyroidism, you might have: If you have hypothyroidism, you could notice: Goiters don't represent any one disease. They can form quickly or very slowly over years. Before iodized salt was introduced in 1920, iodine deficiency was the main cause of goiters in the U.S. It still is worldwide. In the U.S., the main causes of goiters are autoimmune disorders (includingGraves' diseaseorHashimoto's disease) and multinodular goiter. Inflammationof the thyroid, calledthyroiditis, can also cause a goiter. You can get this after getting sick from a virus or aftergiving birth. Risk factors for goiters include: Often, your doctor will diagnose your goiter simply by examining your neck. You may then have tests to find out what caused it and how it affects you. They include: A goiter may not need treatment, especially if it is small and thyroid hormone levels are normal. But if your thyroid hormone levels are too high or too low, you will need treatment. Treatment involves getting the thyroid hormone levels back to normal. Depending on what caused your goiter and how serious it is, your doctor can treat it with: If you have a goiter, your doctor may want to check it on a periodic basis withultrasoundto be sure that it isn’t growing larger or developing suspicious looking nodules that might call for a fine-needle biopsy. You should call the doctor if you experience any of the above symptoms with a goiter because you may have hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism that needs treatment. Goiters are slow-growing, but if you have a large goiter and notice shortness of breath or voice changes, you should call the doctor. The goiter may be pressing on your jugular vein, windpipe,esophagus, or the nerve that runs to your larynx. The growth requires treatment and may need to be surgically removed. SOURCES: The Mayo Clinic: "Goiter." American Thyroid Association: "Goiter." Cleveland Clinic: "Goiter" Medscape: "What is the difference between a toxic and nontoxic goiter." Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.