Kidney diseasecan affect your body’s ability to clean yourblood, filter extra water out of your blood, and help control yourblood pressure. It can also affect red blood cell production andvitamin Dmetabolism needed forbonehealth. You’re born with twokidneys. They’re on either side of yourspine, just above your waist. When your kidneys are damaged, waste products and fluid can build up in your body. That can cause swelling in yourankles,nausea, weakness, poorsleep, and shortness of breath. Without treatment, the damage can get worse and your kidneys may eventually stop working. That’s serious, and it can be life-threatening. Healthy kidneys: Acute kidney disease causes:If your kidneys suddenly stop working, doctors call it acute kidney injury or acuterenal failure. The main causes are: Those things can happen when you: Autoimmune diseases-- when yourimmune systemattacks your body -- can also cause an acute kidney injury. People with severe heart orliver failurecommonly go into acute kidney injury as well. Chronic kidney disease causes:When your kidneys don't work well for longer than 3 months, doctors call it chronic kidney disease. You may not have any symptoms in the early stages, but that's when it’s simpler to treat. Diabetes(types 1 and 2) andhigh blood pressureare the most common culprits. Highblood sugar levelsover time can harm your kidneys. And high blood pressure creates wear and tear on your blood vessels, including those that go to your kidneys. Other conditions include: Defects present at birth can block the urinary tract or affect the kidneys. One of the most common ones, , for example” involves a kind of valve between thebladderand urethra. Aurologistcan often do surgery to repair these problems, which may be found while thebabyis still in the womb. Drugs and toxins -- such aslead poisoning, long-term use of some medications includingNSAIDs(nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) likeibuprofenandnaproxen, and IV street drugs -- can permanently damage your kidneys. So can being around some types of chemicals over time. Your kidneys are very adaptable. They can compensate for some of the problems that can happen when you have kidney disease. So if your kidney damage gets worse slowly, your symptoms will reveal themselves slowly over time. In fact, you may not feel symptoms until your disease is advanced. You might have: Your doctor will start by asking questions about your family medical history, which medications you're taking, and if you notice that you're peeing more or less than normal. After that, they'll do aphysical exam. You also may have: Some forms of kidney disease are treatable. The goals of these treatments are to ease symptoms, help keep the disease from getting worse, and lessen complications. In some cases, your treatment may help restore some of your kidney function. There is no cure for chronic kidney disease. The plan you and your doctor will decide on will depend on what’s causing your kidney disease. In some cases, even when the cause of your condition is controlled, your kidney disease will worsen. Once your kidneys can't keep up with waste on their own, you'll have treatment for end-stage kidney disease. This can include: Dialysis.Waste and extra fluid are taken out of your body when your kidneys can't do it anymore. There are two types: Kidney transplant.A surgeon replaces your kidney with a healthy one from a donor. This donor can be living or deceased. After the procedure, you take medicine for the rest of your life to make sure that your body doesn't reject your new kidney. SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. National Library of Medicine. National Kidney Disease Education Program. Mayo Clinic: "Chronic Kidney Disease." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.