A sting happens when an insect injects venom into yourskin. The venom travels through the bug’s stinger. If you get stung, you’ll feel pain. Your skin may turn red or swell at the site of the sting. In some cases, people who are allergic to the venom can have a life-threatening reaction. Doctors call thisanaphylaxis. Among the most common stinging insects are: Aninsect bitehappens when a non-venomous bug pierces your skin and feeds on yourblood. This may cause a bump (doctors call them “papules”) to form. The telltale sign is intenseitching. Examples of biting insects include: Ticks and some spiders also bite, but technically they are arachnids, not insects. Ticks feed on your blood, but spiders do not. Also, some spiders have venom. You can have anallergic reactionto a bite. And bugs that carry disease pass it on through their bites. This is often the case with ticks (Lyme disease) andmosquitoes(malaria,Zika virus). Most insect bites cause only minor irritation, with symptoms like swelling at the site of the bite or itching or burning. You might also feel numbness or tingling. If you’ve been bitten by a venomous spider, you may notice any of the following: Insect stings and bites can cause severe allergic reactions. Doctors call this “anaphylaxis.” Rarely, a spider bite can cause an allergic reaction that doctors call “anaphylactic shock.” It can be fatal. Call 911 if you have any of these symptoms: If you have any of these things and have epinephrine on hand, don’t hesitate to use it, even if you’re not sure your symptoms are caused by allergies. Using an auto-injector pen as a precaution won’t harm you. SOURCES: New Zealand Dermatological Society: “Arthropod Bites and Stings.” American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: “Stinging Insect Allergy Overview.” KidsHealth.org: “Bug Bites and Stings.” University of Arkansas Anthropod Museum. CDC. California Poison Control and the University of California. PNAS: "A spider that feeds indirectly on vertebrate blood by choosing female mosquitoes as prey." Why do some people bruise more easily? 8 essentials for car or purse. 4 steps for adults. Learn when to call a doctor. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.