Frostbiterefers to the freezing of body tissue (usuallyskin) that results when thebloodvessels contract, reducingbloodflow and oxygen to the affected body parts. Normal sensation is lost, and these tissues change color. Frostbiteis most likely to affect body parts that are farther away from the body core and, therefore, have less blood flow. These include your feet, toes, hands, fingers, nose, and ears. There are three degrees of cold injury: frostnip, superficial frostbite, and deep frostbite. Although children, older people, and those with circulatory problems are at greater risk for frostbite, most cases happen in adults between 30 and 49.   If you develop frostbite, you may not realize at first that anything is wrong, because the affected area may be numb. With prompt medical attention, most people recover fully from frostbite. However, if severe frostbite happens, permanent damage is possible depending on how long and how deeply the tissue was frozen. In severe cases, blood flow to the area may stop, and blood vessels, muscles, nerves, tendons, and bones may be permanently damaged. If the frozen tissue dies, the affected area may need to beamputated. Frostbite is usually caused by long exposure to cold temperatures, particularly if they are accompanied by a low wind-chill factor. It may also happen following more brief exposure to very cold temperatures. For frostnip: Forfrostbite(superficial or deep): Frostbiteis initially diagnosed based on symptoms and aphysical exam. Three to 5 days after rewarming, doctors will use imaging tests to determine how badly the tissue is  damaged. After 1 to 3 weeks, imaging will help find any damagedbloodvessels and identify areas that may need to beamputated. Most people recover completely fromfrostbite, though the affected area may be more sensitive to cold and sun damage and more likely to get frostbitten again. The first goal of treatment is to rewarm the affected area. Frostnip can be treated at home. CAUTION: Don’t rub the affected area because this may increase damage to the tissue. Don’t use a heating pad, heat lamp, stove, fireplace, or radiator to rewarm the affected area. These methods may warm your skin unevenly or may burn your skin, particularly if it’s numb and you can’t tell how hot it’s getting. If the skin tingles and burns as it warms, your circulation is returning. The skin may turn red, but shouldn’t blister or swell. If the skin doesn’t seem to warm, if it remains numb, or if it does blister or swell, seek immediate medical attention. Frostbite requires emergency medical care. CAUTION: If the affected area might be refrozen before you get medical help, don’t warm it; this greatly increases the risk of damage. Also, don’t walk on frostbitten feet or toes unless it's absolutely necessary. At the hospital, frostbite is usually treated comprehensively because you can’t tell how bad it is in the first few days. Usually, patients need to be admitted for observation. Initially, the hospital staff will probably do the following: Later hospital treatment may include whirlpool therapy and physical therapy to promote circulation. Surgery, including amputation of the affected area, is sometimes necessary if the tissues are dead. That’s typically decided between 3 and 6 weeks after the injury. The only way to prevent frostbite is to limit the amount of time you spend outdoors in extremely cold weather. But if you do go out, dressing right is a must: You have a greater chance of getting frostbite if your clothes and footwear get wet. Make sure your layers stay dry. Here are some other frostbite prevention tips: SOURCES: CDC. National Institutes of Medicine: National Library of Medicine. The Mayo Clinic. American Academy of Dermatology: “Frostbite: Prevention and Treatment.” Why do some people bruise more easily? 8 essentials for car or purse. 4 steps for adults. Learn when to call a doctor. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.