Croupcan be uncomfortable and unsettling for your little one. But most mild cases of this condition can actually be treated at home. Here are four ways to make yourbabymore comfortable if they have croup. Keep them calm. Croup causes your little one’s airways to get inflamed and narrow. This can make it hard for them tobreathe. But the more they cry and the more worked-up they get, the worse their symptoms will become. Try to keep yourbabyas calm as possible. Sing to them, cuddle with them, and read them stories. Moisten the air.Use a cool-mist humidifier to moisten dry air. If you don’t have a humidifier, run a hot shower in your bathroom. Once the air is nice and steamy, sit in the bathroom with yourbabyfor 10 minutes. It may help quell theircough. If it’s cool outside, open a door or window for a few minutes. Fresh, cool air may calm their symptoms, too. You might even take yourbabyfor a car ride with the windows rolled down. Give them fluids. It’s important to keep your baby hydrated if they have croup. Warm, clear fluids can help loosenmucusand take pressure off their vocal cords. If they’re very young or really cranky, give them small amounts of fluid using a spoon or medicine dropper. Keep their head elevated. Prop up your little one’s head with an extra pillow when they turn in at night. But don’t use pillows with babies under 12 months of age. You might also consider sleeping in the same room with your child so you can know right away if they start havingbreathing problems. If your child’s symptoms last more than 3 to 5 days or get worse, don’t try to treat them at home. Get medical help right away if your child: SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Croup” KidsHealth.org: “Croup” UptoDate: “Patient education: Croup in Infants and Children (Beyond the Basics).” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.