Preterm laborcan be scary. When a baby is born before they've had time to fully develop, it can have long- and short-term effects on their health. But expecting parents shouldn’t worry too much -- only 12% of pregnancies in the U.S. result in early birth. And modern medicine has found ways to help many premature babies thrive. A normalpregnancylasts about 40 weeks. If you go into labor before 37 weeks, it’s called preterm labor, and your newborn is considered premature. Doctors often don't know exactly why it happens. And about half the time, there’s no known cause. If you’ve had one preterm baby, you’re likely to have another. Other factors include: Not every preterm baby has health problems. But some that do need to stay in the hospital longer than those who go full term. They may spend time in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), where they can get round-the-clock care. Breathing is a common problem for preemies, because their lungs aren’t fully developed. Your baby may need help from a ventilator, a machine that helps them breathe. They’ll need to be breathing on their own before you can take them home. Your little one may also have trouble keeping a normal body temperature and will need to be kept warm. Doctors use incubators for this. Also, if they are born too early to suck and swallow, they’ll have to be fed through a needle in a vein or through a tube that passes through their nose and throat into their stomach. It’s less common, but preemies sometimes can have other problems like: As they get older, some of these children may have other troubles, ranging from difficulty with vision, tocerebral palsy, to learning struggles. SOURCES: The Mayo Clinic. Sidelines National Support Network. Robin Elise Weiss, BirthCare Network. March of Dimes: “Your Premature Baby.” Mayo Clinic: “Premature Birth.” KidsHealth.org: “A Primer on Preemies.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.