Crying is one of the main ways infants communicate. Your baby's loud wails let you know that they arehungry, wet, overtired, uncomfortable, or sick. Once you take care of the need in question, your baby should calm down. Yet some babies keep crying long after they've been fed, changed, and cared for. Instead of calming down, they cry even more intensely. Sometimes babies pull up their legs and pass gas during these screaming fits. Inconsolable crying, with or without gas, may be caused bycolic. As a parent, it's upsetting, especially when you've tried everything you can think of to stop the tears. Colicusually isn't a sign of anything serious, though, and it's very common. Up to 40% of infants have it. The crying spells should subside within a few months. Colic is a term used to describe the condition babies who cry and cry and can't be comforted have. These crying spells often start when babies are around 2 to 3 weeks old. Babies who have colic:  Doctors aren't exactly sure what causes colic. But babies who have colic may: Colic isn't an illness, although some babies do cry a lot when they are sick. Any baby can get colic. It doesn't matter whether the baby is breastfed or bottle-fed. About the same number of baby boys and girls get colic. Babies may be more likely to get colic if they:  Colic should go away on its own. In most babies, colic stops by about age 3 or 4 months. But some babies will have these crying spells for 6 months or more. If your baby keeps crying for hours at a time after they are more than a few months old, your baby may have another health condition that needs to be treated. SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: "Colic." Cleveland Clinic: "Colic." UpToDate: "Patient information: Colic (excessive crying) in infants (Beyond the Basics)." Nemours Foundation: "What Causes Colic?" The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia: "Colic."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.