Thelivercontinuously filtersbloodthat circulates through the body, converting nutrients and drugs absorbed from the digestive tract into ready-to-use chemicals. Theliverperforms many other important functions, such as removing toxins and other chemical waste products from thebloodand readying them for excretion. Because all the blood in the body must pass through it, theliveris unusually accessible tocancercells traveling in the bloodstream.   The liver can be affected by primaryliver cancer, which arises in the liver, or bycancerwhich forms in other parts of the body and then spreads to the liver. Mostliver canceris secondary or metastatic, meaning it started elsewhere in the body. Primary liver cancer, which starts in the liver, accounts for about 2% of cancers in the U.S., but up to half of all cancers in some undeveloped countries. This is mainly due to the prevalence of hepatitis, caused by contagious viruses, that predisposes a person to liver cancer. In the U.S., primary livercancerstrikes twice as many men as women, at an average age of 67. Because the liver is made up of several different types of cells, several types of tumors can form there. Some of these are benign (noncancerous), and some are cancerous and can spread to other parts of the body (metastasize). These tumors have different causes and are treated differently. The outlook for health or recovery depends on what type of tumor you have. The more commonbenign tumorsof the liver include: None of these tumors are treated like livercancer. They may need to be removed surgically if theycause painor bleeding. Liver cancers include: This article discusses hepatocellular carcinoma. It's important to know what type of liver tumor you have. Be sure to get that information from your healthcare provider. Primary liver cancer (hepatocellular carcinoma) tends to occur in livers damaged by birth defects, alcohol abuse, or chronic infection with diseases such as hepatitis B and C, hemochromatosis (a hereditary disease associated with too much iron in the liver), andcirrhosis. More than half of all people diagnosed with primary liver cancer have cirrhosis -- a scarring condition of the liver commonly caused by alcohol abuse. Hepatitis B and C and hemochromatosis can cause permanent damage andliver failure. Liver cancer may also be linked to obesity andfatty liver disease. Various cancer-causing substances are associated with primary liver cancer, including certain herbicides and chemicals such as vinyl chloride and arsenic. Smoking, especially if you abuse alcohol as well, also increases risk. Aflatoxins, cancer-causing substances made by a type of plantmold, have also been implicated. Aflatoxins can contaminate wheat, peanuts, rice, corn, and soybeans. These are rare problems in most developed countries like the U.S. Other causes include the hormones androgen andestrogenand a dye formerly used in medical tests called thorotrast. Other risk factors for liver cancer may include: SOURCES: The Mayo Clinic. American Cancer Society. Allegheny General Hospital Liver Cancer Network What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.