A cold sore is a group of tiny, painful blisters caused by the herpes simplex virus (HSV). They’re also called fever blisters or herpes simplex labialis. Up to 90% of people around the world have at least one form of HSV. The symptoms are usually the most serious the first you time you get cold sores. A first-time cold sore can make a child seriously ill. After the first outbreak, your body should make antibodies, and you may never have another infection. But many people get cold sores that come back. Cold sores are most likely to show up on the outside of yourmouthand lips, but you can also get them on your nose and cheeks. You may get cold sores as late as 20 days after you’re infected. The sore might appear near where the virus entered your body. Cold sores happen in stages: You might also have red or swollen gums, swollen glands in your neck, fever, or muscle aches. First-time infections can also cause: You catch HSV when you come into contact with people or things that carry the virus. For instance, you can get it from kissing someone who has the virus or from sharing eating utensils, towels, or razors. Two types of the virus can cause cold sores: HSV-1 and HSV-2. Both types can also cause sores on your genitals and can be spread by oral sex. Type 1 usually causes cold sores, and type 2 mostly causes genital herpes, but either can be found in both areas. Certain things can trigger an outbreak, including: Cold sores generally aren’t serious, but the infection may be life-threatening for someone who has a weakened immune system because of AIDS, another condition, or medications. If you have a serious case of the skin condition eczema, you may get cold sores over large parts of your body. Your doctor might diagnose a cold sore just by looking at the blisters. They can also swab the blister and test the fluid for HSV. There’s no cure forcold sores. Once you have the virus, it stays in your body. The sores themselves usually heal on their own in 1 or 2 weeks. Antiviral medications can speed healing, especially if you take them at the first sign of an outbreak. Your doctor might tell you to use: Somehome remediescan help you feel better while you heal: Complications from a cold sore are rare, but can happen if the virus spreads to another part of your body, including your: To lower your risk of another outbreak: To keep from spreading the virus, when you have cold sores, don't: Keep in mind that you can spread the virus even if you don't have symptoms. SOURCES: Columbia University College of Dental Medicine: "Cold Sores and Fever Blisters." Academy of General Dentistry: "What Are Cold Sores?" MedlinePlus: "Herpes - oral." American Academy of Dermatology: “Cold Sores.” Cleveland Clinic: “Cold Sores.” Nemours/TeensHealth: “Cold Sores (HSV-1).” National Library of Medicine: “Zovirax.” Mayo Clinic: “Penciclovir (Topical Route),” “Acyclovir (Oral Route, Intravenous Route),” “Famciclovir (Oral Route),” “Valacyclovir (Oral Route),” "Cold Sore." British Association of Dermatologists: “Eczema Herpeticum.” Arvin, A., Campadelli-Fiume, G., Mocarski, E., et al., editors.Human Herpesviruses: Biology, Therapy, and Immunoprophylaxis, Cambridge University Press, 2007. Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.