A bunion is a bony, often painful bump at the base of the big toe. It can happen if your big toe leans slightly toward your other toes. Over time, the base of the big toe pushes outward against the first metatarsal bone, which is directly behind it. Bunions form at a joint. That’s where the toe bends normally when you walk. But when you have a bunion, all of your body weight rests on it each time you take a step. It can hurt when you walk. And, because your shoe likely rubs against it, a bunion can also cause calluses to form. Take a look at your foot. See where the bottom of your big toe connects to your foot? If you see a bony bump there with your big toe headed in the opposite direction, you probably have a bunion. Other symptoms of a bunion include: A bunion may also become shiny and feel warm when you touch it. Foot problems typically start in early adulthood. As we age, our feet spread, and the problems tend to get worse. Factors that may contribute to bunions include: If you have pain when you’re walking in flat shoes that should feel comfortable, make an appointment with a podiatrist (a foot specialist). It could be a bunion or some other problem. Your doctor will look at your foot. They may want to take an X-ray to decide how best to treat your bunion. Your doctor may suggest ways to help with the pressure and pain. These include: If those measures don’t help enough, you might need surgery. Surgery for a bunion might: Foot surgery may take time to recover from fully. If you are considering surgery, talk to your doctor about what you can expect. SOURCES: Milton S. Hershey Medical Center College of Medicine. National Health Services Direct (U.K.). PubMed Health: "Bunions." Mayo Clinic: “Bunions.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.