Obstructive sleep apneais when something blocks part or all of your upper airway while you sleep. Your diaphragm and chest muscles have to work harder to open your airway and pull air into yourlungs. Your breath can become very shallow, or you may even stop breathing briefly. You usually start to breathe again with a loud gasp, snort, or body jerk. You may notsleepwell, but you probably won't know that it’s happening. The condition can also lower the flow of oxygen to your organs and cause unevenheartrhythms. Common obstructivesleep apnea warning signsinclude: If you share a bed with someone, they'll probably notice yoursleep apneabefore you do. Symptoms in children may not be as clear. They may include: Many other medical conditions can also cause these symptoms. Talk to your doctor to rule them out. Obstructive sleep apnea usually happens when the muscles that control your airway relax too much, narrowing your throat. You wake up for a moment to reopen your airway, but you probably won’t remember doing it. This might happen dozens of times each hour. Other things that block your throat can cause obstructive sleep apnea, like obesity, swollen tonsils, and health problems like endocrine disorders or heart failure. Anyone can have obstructive sleep apnea. It’s more likely if you: Complications of obstructive sleep apnea can include: Your doctor will give you a physical exam and ask about your sleep. They may also want to ask people who live with you about your sleep habits. You may need to spend a night in a sleep lab or have asleep studydone at your house. You’ll wear monitors to measure things such as: The study will track how many times you had breathing problems while you slept. Possible treatment options for obstructive sleep apnea include: Weight loss, if needed.Losing even 10% of yourweightcan make a difference. Not drinking alcohol or taking sleeping pills.These make your airway more likely to close during sleep and keep you from breathing like you should for longer periods. Sleeping on your side.This can help if you get mildsleep apneaonly when you sleep on your back. Nasal sprays.These can help ifsinusproblems or nasal congestion make it harder to breathe while you sleep. CPAPmachine.This device includes a mask that you wear over your nose,mouth, or both. An air blower forces constant air through your nose ormouth. The air pressure is just enough to keep your upper airway tissues from relaxing too much while you sleep. A similar device is the BPAP, which has two levels of air flow that change when you breathe in and out. Oral devices.If you have mildsleep apnea, you might get dental appliances or oral "mandibular advancement" devices that keep yourtonguefrom blocking your throat or bring your lower jaw forward. That may help keep your airway open while you sleep. A trained dental expert can decide which type of device may be best for you. Surgery.This is for people who have extra or uneven tissue that blocks airflow through the nose or throat. For example, if you have a deviated nasal septum, swollen tonsils, andadenoids, or a small lower jaw that causes your throat to be too narrow, surgery might help you. Doctors usually try other treatments first. Types of surgery for obstructive sleep apnea include: Upper airway stimulator. This device, called Inspire, has a small pulse generator that your surgeon puts under theskinin your upper chest. A wire leading to yourlungtracks your natural breathing pattern. Another wire, leading up to your neck, delivers mild signals to nerves that control your airway muscles, keeping them open. You can use a remote to turn it on before bed and turn it off in the morning. Somnoplasty.Your doctor uses radiofrequency energy to tighten the tissue at the back of your throat. UPPP, or UP3.This procedure takes out soft tissue in the back of your throat and palate, making your airway wider at your throat opening. (UPPP stands for uvulopalatopharyngoplasty.) Nasal surgery. These operations correct obstructions in your nose, such as a deviated septum (when the wall between your nostrils is off-center). Mandibular/maxillary advancement surgery.Your doctor moves your jawbone and face bones forward to make more room in the back of your throat. It’s a complex procedure used only for people who have severe sleep apnea and problems with their head or face. SOURCES: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "What is Sleep Apnea?;" “What Are Sleep Studies;” “Your Guide to Healthy Sleep;” and “Who Is at Risk for Sleep Apnea?” UpToDate: “Management of Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults,” “Patient education: Sleep apnea in adults (Beyond the Basics).” MedlinePlus: "Sleep Apnea." American Sleep Apnea Association. National Sleep Foundation: “The Sleep Disorders.” Journal of Neurogastroenterology and Motility: “Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease and Sleep Disorders: Evidence for a Causal Link and Therapeutic Implications.” Mayo Clinic: “Obstructive sleep apnea,” “Deviated septum.” Know your myths from your facts. What do they say about you? You may need a sleep study. Which type do you  have? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.