The name of the condition tells you a bit about what it is: Peripheral: Beyond (in this case, beyond thebrainand the spinal cord.)Neuro-: Related to the nerves-pathy: Disease Peripheral neuropathyrefers to the conditions that result when nerves that carry messages to and from thebrainand spinal cord from and to the rest of the body are damaged or diseased.   The peripheral nerves make up an intricate network that connects thebrainand spinal cord to the muscles,skin, and internal organs. Peripheral nerves come out of the spinal cord and are arranged along lines in the body calleddermatomes. Typically, damage to a nerve will affect one or more dermatomes, which can be tracked to specific areas of the body. Damage to these nerves interrupts communication between thebrainand other parts of the body and can impair muscle movement, prevent normal sensation in the arms and legs, andcause pain. There are several different kinds of peripheral neuropathies that stem from a variety of causes. They range from carpal tunnel syndrome (a traumatic injury common after chronic repetitive use of the hands and wrists, such as with computer use) tonerve damagelinked to diabetes. As a group, peripheral neuropathies are common, especially among people over the age of 55. All together, the conditions affect 3% to 4% of people in this group. Neuropathies are typically classified according to the problems they cause or what is at the root of the damage. There also are terms that express how extensively the nerves have been damaged. Damage to a single peripheral nerve is called mononeuropathy. Physical injury or trauma such as from an accident is the most common cause. Prolonged pressure on a nerve, caused by extended periods of being sedentary (such as sitting in a wheelchair or lying in bed), or continuous, repetitive motions, can trigger a mononeuropathy. Carpal tunnel syndromeis a common type of mononeuropathy. It is called an overuse strain injury, which occurs when the nerve that travels through the wrist is compressed. People whose work requires repeated motions with the wrist (such as assembly-line workers, physical laborers, and those who use computer keyboards for prolonged periods) are at greater risk. The damage to the nerve can result in numbness, tingling, unusual sensations, and pain in the first three fingers on the thumb side of the hand. The person may awaken at night with numbness in their hand or discover that when they perform activities like using ahairdryer, the numbness is more noticeable. In time, carpal tunnel injuries can weaken the muscles in the hand. You may also feel pain, tingling, or burning in your arm andshoulder. Here are examples of other mononeuropathies that can cause weakness in the affected parts of the body, such as hands and feet: Neuropathy can affect nerves that control muscle movement (motor nerves) and those that detect sensations such as coldness or pain (sensory nerves). In some cases, it can affect internal organs, such as theheart,bloodvessels,bladder, orintestines. Neuropathy that affects internal organs is called an autonomic neuropathy. This rare condition can causelow blood pressureor problems withsweating.  Polyneuropathy accounts for the greatest number of peripheral neuropathy cases. It occurs when multiple peripheral nerves throughout the body malfunction at the same time. Polyneuropathy can have a wide variety of causes, including exposure to certain toxins such as with alcohol abuse, poor nutrition (particularly vitamin B deficiency), and complications from diseases such ascanceror kidney failure. One of the most common forms of chronic polyneuropathy isdiabetic neuropathy, a condition that occurs in people withdiabetes. It is more severe in people with poorly controlled blood sugar levels. Though less common, diabetes can also cause a mononeuropathy. The most common symptoms of polyneuropathy are: Because people with chronic polyneuropathy often lose their ability to sense temperature and pain, they can burn themselves and develop open sores as the result of injury or prolonged pressure. If the nerves serving the organs are involved,diarrheaorconstipationmay result, as well as loss of bowel orbladdercontrol. Sexual dysfunction and abnormally low blood pressure also can occur. One of the most serious polyneuropathies isGuillain-Barre syndrome, a rare disease that strikes suddenly when the body's immune system attacks nerves in the body just as they leave the spinal cord. Symptoms tend to appear quickly and worsen rapidly, sometimes leading to paralysis. Early symptoms include weakness and tingling that eventually may spread upward into the arms.Blood pressureproblems,heartrhythm problems, and breathing difficulty may occur in the more severe cases. However, despite the severity of the disease, recovery rates are good when patients receive treatment early. Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathyis a chronic form of Guillain-Barre in which the symptoms continue for months and even years. Early diagnosis and treatment is crucial for CIDP patients, 30% of which risk eventually being confined to a wheelchair. There are many factors that can cause peripheral neuropathies, so it is often difficult to pinpoint the origin. Neuropathies occur by one of three methods:  SOURCES: Bromberg M.Seminars In Neurology, June 2005. National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS). The Official Patient's Sourcebook on Peripheral Neuropathy: A Revised and Updated Directory for the Internet Age, October 1, 2002. Sghirlanzoni A.Lancet Neurology, June 2005. Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.