All potentially cancerousskingrowths must be biopsied to confirm acancerdiagnosis. Depending on the suspected type ofskin cancer, the biopsy techniques vary slightly but crucially. Any potentialmelanomarequires a surgical biopsy, in which the entire growth is removed with a scalpel if possible. A pathologist then studies the sample under a microscope to determine whethercancercells are present. Ifmelanomais diagnosed, other tests may be ordered to assess the degree ofcancerspread (metastasis). They include: Skingrowths that are most likelybasal cell carcinoma,squamous cell carcinoma, or other forms of non-melanomacan be biopsied in various ways. Part or all of the growth can be taken with a scalpel for examination under a microscope.  Most skin cancers are detected and cured before they spread. Melanoma that has spread to other organs presents the greatest treatment challenge. Standard treatments for localized basal cell and squamous cellcarcinomasare safe and effective and cause few side effects. Small tumors can be surgically excised, removed with skin scraping and electric current cauterization, frozen with liquid nitrogen, or killed with low-doseradiation. In rare cases where basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma has begun to spread beyond the local skin site, the primary tumors are first removed surgically. Then patients may be treated with radiation, immunotherapy in the form ofinterferon, and rarely,chemotherapy. However, responses to this therapy are infrequent and short-lived. Rare patients with advanced squamous cell carcinoma respond well to a combination of retinoic acid (a derivative ofvitamin A) and interferon (a type of disease-fighting protein produced in labs forcancerimmunotherapy). Retinoic acid may inhibit cancer recurrence in patients who have had tumors removed, but there is a lack of evidence to support either of these treatments. Vismodegib (Erivedge) may be used to treat the rare cases of locally advanced, or metastatic, basal cell carcinoma and has been shown to shrink these tumors.Sonidegib(Odomzo) can be used to treat patients with locally advanced basal cell carcinoma who are not candidates for surgery or radiation. It may also be used if theskin cancerreturns after surgery or radiation. Melanoma tumors must be removed surgically, preferably before they spread beyond the skin into other organs. The surgeon removes the tumor fully, along with a safe margin of surrounding tissue and possibly nearby lymph nodes. Neither radiation norchemotherapywill cure advanced melanoma, but either treatment may slow the disease and relieve symptoms.Chemotherapy, sometimes in combination with immunotherapy -- such as interferon, interleukin-2 -- is generally preferred. If melanoma spreads to thebrain, radiation is used to slow the growth and control symptoms. Proton therapy may be used, as well. Immunotherapy is a field ofcancer treatmentthat attempts to target and kill cancer cells by manipulating the body's immune system. Some of the most promising developments in the field of immunotherapy have arisen from efforts to cure advanced melanoma. Some researchers are treating advanced cases withvaccines, while others are using drugs such as interferon, interleukin-2, andipilimumab(Yervoy) in an effort to stimulate immune cells into attacking melanoma cells more aggressively. In patients with advanced melanoma, two drugs,nivolumab(Opdivo)andpembrolizumab(Keytruda) have been found to be effective after use of ipilimumab. These drugs help block proteins on T cells that normally help keep them in check, therefore allowing these immune cells to attack melanoma cells. Genetic manipulation of melanoma tumors may make them more vulnerable to attack by the immune system. Each of these treatment approaches aims to immunize a patient's body against its own cancer -- something the body cannot do naturally. There are other drugs that target specific genes within normal cells that cause them to become cancerous. Called targeted therapy, these drugs includedabrafenib(Tafinlar),trametinib(Mekinist) andvemurafenib(Zelboraf). People who have had skin cancer once are at risk for getting it again. Anyone who has been treated for skin cancer of any kind should have a checkup at least twice a year. About 20% of skin cancer patients experience recurrence or a second separate tumor, often within the first two years after diagnosis. Once skin cancer is diagnosed, the only acceptable treatment is medical care. Alternative approaches may be useful in cancer prevention and in combatingnausea,vomiting,fatigue, andheadachesfrom chemotherapy, radiation, or immunotherapy used to treat advanced skin cancer. Be sure to discuss any alternative treatments you are considering using with your cancer doctor. Skin experts know that the mineral zinc and the antioxidant vitamins A (beta-carotene), C, and E can help repair damaged body tissue and promotehealthy skin. Now, researchers are trying to determine whether these and other nutrients might protect skin from the harmful effects of sunlight. To test the theory, selected skin cancer patients are given experimentalsupplementsof these vitamins in the hope of preventing cancer recurrence. Thus far, no nutrient has been found to be protective against skin cancer. SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology: "Skin Cancer." National Cancer Institute: "Skin Cancer." American Cancer Society: "Skin Cancer: Basal and Squamous Cells." American Cancer Society: "Melanoma Skin Cancer." American Cancer Society: "Targeted therapy for melanoma skin cancer." Pagination What you need to know. For healthy blood cells. Separate fact from fiction. Symptoms, screening tests, and more. © 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.