 Bladder infectionshave a way of getting your attention. You make countless trips to the bathroom, and still you feel like you have to go again. And once you’re in there, instead of mindlessly going about your business, you feel burning or stinging every time you pee. When you get a bladder infection, it leads to cystitis, which is when yourbladderswells and gets irritated. That’s what causes the symptoms. A bladder infection is the most common type ofurinary tract infection(UTI). Here are the parts of your urinary tract and what they do: Women get bladder infections much more than men do. Usually, the infections are more annoying than they are serious, andantibioticsare the treatment. But they can travel up the ureters to the kidneys and cause more severe problems, so it’s important to treat them right away. The main culprits are bacteria, usuallyE. coli. These bacteria live on yourskinand in yourintestinesand most of the time, they’re not a problem. Everyone has them. But if they get into the urethra, they can end up in the bladder and cause an infection. Bladder infections are more common in women than men for several reasons. A woman’s urethra is shorter than a man’s, and it’s close to thevaginaandanus, where bacteria live. Havingsex, wiping from back to front after you go to the bathroom, putting in a tampon, and using adiaphragmforbirth controlare all ways bacteria can get in. Duringpregnancy, the baby can press on your bladder, which prevents it from emptying completely and gives bacteria a place to thrive. Aftermenopause, women have less of thehormoneestrogen. That causes the lining of the urethra to get thinner and may change the balance of bacteria in thevagina, making infections more likely. When men get them, aprostateinfection usually is the cause. But any blockage -- like from a bladder stone orenlarged prostate-- can prevent the bladder from totally emptying and cause infection. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Cystitis,” “Urinary Tract Infection (UTI).” NHS: “Cystitis.” Victoria State Government: “Cystitis.” KidsHealth: “Urinary Tract Infections.” Merck Manual: “Bladder Infection (Cystitis).” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.