Whether your shoes are too tight or you touched a hot stove, the result is all too familiar: a painful pocket ofskinthat's filled with fluid. A singleblisterlike that is usually easy to treat at home, but if you see signs of infection, it's time to call your doctor. Friction.You can getblisterswhen something rubs against your skin, like a tool handle or a new pair of shoes. Unlikecornsand calluses, which show up after rubbing that's gone on for a long time, friction blisters come from brief, intense contact on a small area. Burns. You can get a blister from getting too close to a flame or steam, or if you touch a hot surface. A severesunburncan also cause blisters. Cold.An extremely low temperature on your skin can cause blisters. For example, you might get one if your doctor freezes off awart. Irritants orallergytriggers. Your skin may blister if you come in contact with certain chemicals,cosmetics, and many plant allergens. You may hear your doctor call this problem irritant or allergiccontact dermatitis. Drug reactions. Sometimes your blisters may be a reaction to a drug you take. When your doctor prescribes a new medicine, always let them know about any drug reactions you've had in the past. And call your doctor if you get a blister after taking amedication. Autoimmune diseases. Three diseases that curb yourimmune system-- your body's defense against germs -- can cause blisters: Infection. Blisters are a common symptom of conditions likechickenpox,cold sores,shingles, and a skin infection calledimpetigo. Genes.There are rare genetic diseases that cause the skin to be fragile and to blister. If you leave your blister alone, it often gets better in 1 or 2 weeks. While it's healing, stay away from the activity that brought on the blister. Some steps you can take to help the healing process: Put on a loose bandage.It protects your blister while it heals. Keep it padded.If your blister rubs up against your shoe, you can stop it from getting worse by using padding underneath the bandage. Usually, there's no need to drain your blister, but you may want to if it's large and hurts a lot. If you decide to do it, use a small needle that you've sterilized with rubbing alcohol. Then pierce the edge of the blister. Afterward, wash the spot with soap and water and cover with petroleum jelly. Be on the lookout for signs that your blister is infected. Call your doctor if it gets more painful or you notice:  SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians. Sportsmedicine.com. UpToDate. American Academy of Dermatology: "How to prevent and treat blisters." Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.