There's a lot riding on your spinal column. It's your body's main structural support. It needs to keep you stable enough to stand upright but flexible enough for movement. So it's no surprise that many people have back problems from time to time. The hurt can stem fromsore muscles, ligaments, and tendons, or from herniated disks,fractures, and other problems in your upper, middle, and lower back. Sometimes you feel the effects right away. But in many cases, back problems develop over time. We often bring on our back problems through bad habits, such as: Thespineis actually a stack of 24 bones called vertebrae. A healthy spine is S-shaped when viewed from the side. It curves back at your shoulders and inward at your neck and small of your back. It houses and protects your spinal cord, the network of nerves that transmit feeling and control movement throughout your entire body.   One of the more commontypes of back paincomes from straining the bands of muscles surrounding thespine. It happens most often in the curve of the low back and the base of the neck. These areas support more weight than your upper and mid back, which are less prone to trouble. Injuries from contact sports, accidents, and falls can cause problems ranging from minor muscle strains, to herniated disks, to fractures that damage the spinal column or cord. Stabbing low back pain could be from muscle spasms, when your muscles seize up and don't relax, like a cramp. Osteoarthritiscan affect your vertebrae, when thecartilagebetween them wears down.Bone spursor aherniated diskcan push on nerves. Pregnancyoften brings onback pain, too. Hormonal changes andweight gainput new kinds of stresses on a pregnant woman's spine and legs. Sometimes your back might be sore for no clear reason. That's called nonspecific backache. It could come from weak muscles that can't handle everyday walking, bending, andstretching. Back pain-- whether a dull ache or shooting -- is just one sign that something's going on with your back. You may also have feelings in your legs or arms: Uncontrolled peeing orpooping, or inability to pee, and muscle weakness could mean a serious problem like spinal cord compression. Call your doctor right away. You should see a doctor: During your exam, your doctor will test your range of motion -- unless you can't move -- and check how well your nerves are working. That may be enough to decide what to do next. You might need imaging tests, like X-rays, anMRI, or aCT scan. But they're not always useful, and there's not always a direct link between the results of these tests and how much it hurts. Your specific treatment will depend on what's causing your pain and where in your back it is. Despite what you may think or have been told before, staying in bed isn't usually the answer; gentleexerciseis. It will help work out the kinks, build support for your spine, and improve your flexibility. A physical therapist can work with you to design a set of exercises, give you relief from the pain, and get you moving again. Over-the-counter pain relievers, ice, and heat will work to take the edge off most back pain. Your doctor can prescribe stronger medicines, but some can make you drowsy or dependent on them if you're not careful. Complementary therapies, such aschiropracticspinal manipulation,acupuncture, andmassage, can help ease pain, too. If aboneis damaged, or you have a herniated disk orpinched nerve, you may need surgery. But for ongoing back pain, doctors will try other treatments first. Counselingcould help you learn to live with chronic pain better as well as deal withsymptoms of depressionbecause of it. Exercise! Strengthening the muscles around your spine and in your core will help keep you stable and balanced.Walkingis great for your low back, and it's simple to do. Practice good posture. As a rule of thumb, aim to keep your ears, shoulders, and hips aligned when you sit, stand, and walk. Lift heavy things correctly, using your hips and knees for power while keeping your back straight. Try sleeping on your side, with a medium-firm mattress. Don't smoke. It restrictsbloodflow, so your muscles and tissues don't get a good supply of nutrients and oxygen. SOURCES: Oh, W.The Clinical Journal of Pain,January/February 2004. Friedman, F.Outwitting Back Pain: Why Your Lower Back Hurts and How to Make It Stop, Lyons Press, 2004. Mayo Clinic: "Back pain: Symptoms." Is a firm mattress best for back pain? Maybe not. Learn about surgery options, possible risks, and recovery. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.