Inside your abdominal cavity is the long, tubular digestive tract. The second part of this tube -- the large intestine -- is composed of thecolon, which stretches 4 feet to 6 feet, and the rectum, which is only 4 inches to 6 inches long. The inner lining of this "colorectal tube" can be a fertile breeding ground for small tumors, called polyps (Figure 1). About a quarter of all adults in the U.S. older than age 50 will have at least one colorectal polyp. Most colorectal cancers develop from polyps in glandular tissue of the intestinal lining. Most polyps are benign, but at least one type is known to be precancerous. These are called adenomatous polyps. The size of the polyp correlates with the development ofcancer. Polyps less than 1 centimeter in size have a slightly greater than a 1% chance of becomingcancer, but those 2 centimeters or greater have a 40% chance of transforming intocancer. Overall, the incidence is about 5%. Most colorectal cancers develop from polyps in glandular tissue of the intestinal lining.   If colorectal cancer is diagnosed and treated early while the tumor is still localized, the disease is highly curable, with five-year survival rates of about 90%. If the tumor continues to grow, cancer can spread directly through the bowel wall to surrounding lymph nodes, tissues, and organs, as well as into the bloodstream. Once the cancer spreads to lymph nodes or other organs, successful treatment becomes more difficult. Depending on how advanced the disease is, five-year survival rates range from 11% to 87%. Cancers of the colon and rectum are common, with approximately 135,000 cases diagnosed each year. Like many cancers,colorectal canceris of particular concern for people older than age 50. Although diagnosis is often possible at an early stage, many people delay seeking medical care because they are embarrassed or fearful of symptoms related to their bowels. Risk increases significantly after age 50 and continues to increase with age. The exactcause of colorectal canceris not known. But there are several risk factors for the disease.  SOURCES: American Cancer Society. National Cancer Institute. WebMD Medical Reference from the American College of Physicians: “Section 12 V Colorectal Cancer.” The age people should begin getting routine screenings. What to expect when the cancer spreads to other areas. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.