Tuberculosis(TB) is a contagious infection that usually attacks yourlungs. It can also spread to other parts of your body, like yourbrainandspine. A type of bacteria calledMycobacterium tuberculosiscauses it. Can tuberculosis be cured? In the 20thcentury, TB was a leading cause of death in the United States. Today, most cases are cured withantibiotics. But it takes a long time. You have to take medications for at least 6 to 9 months. A TB infection doesn’t always mean you’ll get sick. There are two forms of the disease: A latent or active TB infection can also bedrug-resistant, meaning certain medications don’t work against the bacteria. Latent TB doesn’t have symptoms. Askinorbloodtest can tell if you have it. Signs of active TB disease include: If you have any of these symptoms, see your doctor to get tested. Get medical help right away if you have chest pain. Tuberculosis is caused by bacteria that spread through the air, just like acoldorthe flu. You can get TB only if you come into contact with people who have it. You could be more likely to get TB if: Ahealthy immune systemfights the TB bacteria. But you might not be able to fend off active TB disease if you have: Babies and young children also have higher chances of getting it because their immune systems aren’t fully formed. When someone who has TBcoughs, sneezes, talks, laughs, or sings, they release tiny droplets that contain the germs. If youbreathein these germs, you can get it. TB isn’t easy to catch. You usually have to spend a long time around someone who has a lot of the bacteria in their lungs. You’re most likely to catch it from co-workers, friends, and family members. Tuberculosis germs don’t thrive on surfaces. You can’t get it from shaking hands with someone who has it or by sharing their food or drink. There are two common tests for tuberculosis: Those tests don’t tell you if your infection is latent or active. If you get a positive skin or blood test, your doctor will learn which type you have with: Your treatment will depend on your infection. Whatever kind of infection you have, it’s important to finish taking all of your medications, even when you feel better. If you quit too soon, the bacteria can become resistant to the drugs. Like any medication, TB drugs can have side effects. Common isoniazid side effects include: Ethambutol side effects may include: Some pyrazinamide side effects include: Common rifampin side effects include: Tuberculosis infection can cause complications such as: To help stop the spread of TB: Tuberculosis vaccine Children in countries where TB is common often get the BCG vaccine. It isn’t widely used in the United States, and it doesn’t always protect against infection. Doctors recommend it only for children living with someone who has an active TB infection with a very drug-resistant strain or who can’t take antibiotics. Other vaccines are being developed and tested. Your outlook depends on several things, including your overall health, how severe the infection is, and how well you follow your doctor’s directions on treatment. In the United States, experts estimate that treatment works in more than 95% of cases. SOURCES: Brian W. Christman, MD, professor and vice-chair, Vanderbilt University Medical Center; volunteer national spokesperson, American Lung Association. CDC: “Tuberculosis.” American Lung Association: “Learn About Tuberculosis.” Mayo Clinic: “Tuberculosis.” World Health Organization: “Tuberculosis,” “Smoking and tuberculosis: a dangerous combination.” U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation Statement: “Screening for Latent Tuberculosis Infection in Adults.” Cedars-Sinai: “Tuberculosis (TB).” MedlinePlus: “Acid-Fast Bacillus (AFB) Tests.” UpToDate: “Treatment of drug-resistant pulmonary tuberculosis in adults,” “Treatment of drug-susceptible pulmonary tuberculosis in HIV-uninfected adults.” American Lung Association: “Tuberculosis (TB).” Medscape: “Isoniazid,” “Pyrazinamide,” “Rifampin.” Mayo Clinic: “Ethambutol (Oral Route).” Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia: “A Look at Each Vaccine: Tuberculosis Vaccine.”     You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.