The ovaries are almond-sized organs -- one on each side of the uterus -- that store eggs and make female hormones. When you haveovarian cancer, malignant cells begin to grow in the ovary.Cancerthat starts in another part of your body can also spread, or metastasize, to your ovaries, but that is not considered ovarian cancer. Researchers have many theories, but no one knows exactly what causes ovarian cancer. Scientists have not been able to find a single chemical in our environment or our diets that they can link specifically to ovarian cancer, unlike some other kinds ofcancer. Certain things -- genetics or the way you live -- can raise the odds that you’ll get ovarian cancer, but that doesn’t necessarily mean you’ll get it. Some ovarian cancers are linked to gene changes first discovered in families with lots of cases ofbreast cancer. Those mutations are called BRCA1 (breast cancergene 1) and BRCA2 (breast cancergene 2). If your family came from Eastern Europe or you have Ashkenazi Jewish ancestors, your odds of having one of the BRCA mutations are higher. Another set of gene mutations that raises your ovariancancerrisk is one that causesLynch syndrome, also called hereditary nonpolyposiscolorectal canceror HNPCC. If one of your close relatives (grandmother, mother, sister, daughter) had ovarian cancer, you have an increased risk as well, even if their cancer wasn’t linked to a genetic mutation. Your risk also goes up if you have a family history of breast cancer,colon cancer,uterine cancer, or rectal cancer. Your risk is higher if you’ve had another type ofcancer, likemelanomaorcervical cancer. Other things that can raise your risk of ovarian cancer include: Your chances of getting ovarian cancer are also affected by your reproductive history: when your period began and ended, whether you had children, and related issues. You have higher odds of getting ovarian cancer if: Other things that may increase your ovarian cancer risk include: Some people believe using talcum powder near your genitals is linked to ovarian cancer, but the evidence on that is not clear. Talk with your doctor about early screening options likebloodtests and pelvic imaging if any of these risk factors apply to you. Ovarian canceris tricky. It’s hard to spot and spreads faster than any othercancerin thefemale reproductive system. Because so little is known about the specificcauses of ovarian cancer, there’s not a long list of ways to prevent it. If your family history points to a higher risk, your doctor can help you decide how best to manage your situation. Options include genetic testing andcounseling. If your risk is high, you may decide to have your ovaries removed as a precaution. This surgery is called a prophylactic oophorectomy. Eating a diet low in fat may lower your risk of ovarian cancer, and in general,exercisingand keeping ahealthy weightcan reduce your risk of many diseases. Other things that can lower your odds of ovarian cancer include: Ovarian cancer comes back, or recurs, after treatment in more than 80% of cases. But the odds of this happening largely depend on how far it had spread (called the stage) when you got the diagnosis. Chances of recurrence by stage are: Survival rates are the percentage of people who live a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after diagnosis. Overall, about 46% of women with ovarian cancer live at least 5 years after diagnosis. By stage, 5-year ovarian cancer survival rates are: Remember that everyone’s case is different, so these numbers are only a guideline. Your doctor can talk with you about what to expect. SOURCES: National Cancer Institute: "Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary Peritoneal Cancer,” “Surgery for Recurrent Ovarian Cancer Does Not Improve Survival.” Ovarian Cancer Research Alliance: "What is Ovarian Cancer?" “Recurrence.” American Cancer Society: "About Ovarian Cancer,” “Survival Rates for Ovarian Cancer.” National Ovarian Cancer Coalition: "Am I at Risk for Ovarian Cancer?" Mayo Clinic: "Diseases and Conditions -- Ovarian cancer," "Diseases and Conditions -- Polycystic Ovary Syndrome." CDC: "Ovarian Cancer." Medscape: “What is the prognosis of ovarian cancer?” What are the symptoms? Get to know the symptoms. HPV is the top cause. Find out more. See it in pictures, plus read the facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.