Myasthenia gravisis a chronic condition that causes muscles to tire and weaken easily. For example, if you have myasthenia gravis, you may notice that during a meal, your jaw muscles becometiredand weak, interfering with your ability to chew food. After you have rested for a little while, the muscles may become strong again, allowing you to resume eating. This waxing-and-waning weakness of muscles, worsening with use and improving with rest, is a hallmark of this disease. There typically are periods when you may notice more symptoms (called an exacerbation), interspersed with periods when symptoms decrease or disappear (remission). Myasthenia gravis affecting multiple muscle groups throughout the body is called generalized myasthenia gravis. Other common muscle groups that are affected may make it difficult for you to chew, swallow, smile, shrug, lift your arm up, grip, rise to a stand, or walk up stairs. When the muscles needed forbreathingare affected, a patient is said to be in myasthenic crisis. This is a life-threatening situation. Though anyone can get myasthenia gravis, those most likely to do so are women between ages 20 and 40 or men between ages 50 and 70. If a woman with myasthenia gravis gives birth, thebabymay have some temporary, and potentially life-threatening, muscle weakness (neonatal myasthenia) because ofantibodiesthat have transferred from the mother's bloodstream. Typically, during thebaby's first weeks of life, the antibodies are cleared from thebaby's circulation and thebabydevelops normal muscle tone and strength. The disease most commonly affects muscles that controleyeand eyelid movement, so the first symptoms you notice may be eyelid drooping and/or blurred or doubledvision. The majority will go on to have weakness in other muscle groups in 1 or 2 years. General symptoms of myasthenia gravis include: If the muscles you use to breathe get weak enough that you can’t control them, it’s called a myasthenic crisis. This is a medical emergency that may requirea ventilatorto help you breathe. Around 15% to 20% of people with myasthenia gravis have at least one myasthenic crisis. They can be caused by an infection,stress, surgery, or a reaction tomedication. Under normal conditions, nerves direct your muscles to work by sending a message through an area called a receptor. The chemical that delivers the message is called acetylcholine. When acetylcholine binds to a nerve receptor, your muscle knows to contract. In myasthenia gravis, your body attacks its acetylcholine receptors. Myasthenia gravis is considered to be an autoimmune disorder. In anautoimmune disease, some of the body's antibodies (special proteins in your body that are supposed to be programmed to fight foreign invaders such as bacteria, viruses, or fungi) mistake a part of your own body as foreign, resulting in its destruction. In the case of myasthenia gravis, antibodies block, attack or destroy the acetylcholine receptors needed for muscle contraction. No one knows exactly what causes the body to begin producing the antibodies that destroy acetylcholine receptors. In some cases, the process seems to be related to the thymus gland, which helps produce antibodies. About 15% of all myasthenia gravis patients are found to have a thymoma, a tumor of the thymus. Although most thymomas are benign (not cancerous), the thymus is usually removed (thymectomy) to prevent the potential spread ofcancer. In fact, thymectomy seems to improve symptoms of myasthenia gravis in some patients, even if no tumor is present. To see if you have myasthenia gravis, your doctor will start with a neurological exam. This includes a test of your: Then you’ll have tests to help look more closely at symptoms of myasthenia gravis. These include: Your treatment will depend on your age, how severe your symptoms are, and how fast the condition is progressing. You might need one or several treatments together. Your doctor may recommend a medication such as: If you’re dealing with a sudden worsening of symptoms or will soon have surgery or other therapies, your doctor may recommend intravenous (IV) therapy. Choices for this include: If your myasthenia gravis is due to a tumor on your thymus gland, you may need surgery to remove the whole gland (thymectomy). Even if you don’t have a tumor, taking your thymus out may help ease your symptoms. It may take years to see benefits from a thymectomy. You may need open surgery to remove your thymus. A surgeon opens your breastbone to get to your thymus and take it out. Another option that may work is minimally invasive surgery. There are two options: In addition to medical treatments, you can make lifestyle changes to help manage your myasthenia gravis symptoms, including:  SOURCES: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America. Mayo Clinic: “Myasthenia gravis.” Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.