 Anemiais defined as a low number of redblood cells. In a routine blood test, anemia is reported as a low hemoglobin or hematocrit. Hemoglobin is the main protein in your red blood cells. It carries oxygen, and delivers it throughout your body. If you have anemia, your hemoglobin level will be low too. If it is low enough, your tissues or organs may not get enough oxygen.Symptoms of anemia-- likefatigueor shortness of breath -- happen because your organs aren't getting what they need to work the way they should. Anemiais the most common blood condition in the U.S. It affects almost 6% of the population. Women, young children, and people with long-term diseases are more likely to have anemia. Important things to remember are: There are many types of anemia. All have different causes and treatments. Some forms -- like the mild anemia that happens during pregnancy -- aren’t a major concern. But some types of anemia may reflect a serious underlying medical condition The signs of anemia can be so mild that you might not even notice them. At a certain point, as your blood cells decrease, symptoms often develop. Depending on the cause of the anemia, symptoms may include: There are more than 400 types of anemia, and they’re divided into three groups: Anemia Caused by Blood Loss You can lose red blood cells through bleeding. This can happen slowly over a long period of time, and you might not notice. Causes can include: Anemia Caused by Decreased or Faulty Red Blood Cell Production With this type of anemia, your body may not create enough blood cells, or they may not work the way they should. This can happen because there’s something wrong with your red blood cells or because you don’t have enoughmineralsandvitaminsfor your red blood cells to form normally. Conditions associated with these causes of anemia include: Bone marrow and stem cell problemsmay keep your body from producing enough red blood cells. Some of the stem cells in the marrow that’s in the center of your bones will develop into red blood cells. If there aren’t enough stem cells, if they don’t work right, or if they’re replaced by other cells such as cancer cells, you might get anemia. Anemia caused by bone marrow or stem cell problems includes: Iron-deficiency anemiahappens because you don’t have enough of the mineral iron in your body. Your bone marrow needs iron to make hemoglobin, the part of the red blood cell that takes oxygen to your organs. Iron-deficiency anemia can be caused by: Sickle cell anemiais a disorder that, in the U.S., affects mainly African Americans and Hispanic Americans. Your red blood cells, which are usually round, become crescent-shaped because of a problem in your genes. Anemia results when the red blood cells break down quickly, so oxygen doesn’t get to your organs. The crescent-shaped red blood cells can also get stuck in tiny blood vessels andcause pain. Vitamin-deficiency anemiacan happen when you aren’t getting enoughvitamin B12and folate. You need these two vitamins to make red blood cells. This kind of anemia can be caused by: Other causes of vitamin deficiency include medications,alcohol abuse, and intestinal diseases such as tropical sprue. Anemia associated with other chronic conditionsusually occurs in the setting of long-standing inflammation. Inflammatory proteins slow the bone marrow's production of young red blood cells in a variety of ways. Conditions that cause this type of anemia include: Anemia Caused by Destruction of Red Blood Cells When red blood cells are fragile and can’t handle thestressof traveling through your body, they may burst, causing what’s calledhemolytic anemia. You might have this condition at birth, or it could come later. Sometimes, the causes of hemolytic anemia are unclear, but they can include: A complete blood count (CBC) test will measure your red blood cells, hemoglobin, and other parts of your blood. Your doctor will ask about yourfamily historyand your medical history after the CBC. They’ll probably do some tests, including: Your treatment will depend on your type of anemia. SOURCES: American Academy of Family Physicians. The American Medical Athletic Association. Albemarle Pulmonary Medical Associates, PA. Gary W. Tamkin, MD, attending physician, Highland General Hospital -- Alameda County Medical Center, Oakland. Cornell University Department of Animal Science. PLoS One: "The Prevalence of Anemia and Moderate-Severe Anemia in the US Population (NHANES 2003-2012)." CDC. American Society of Hematology: “Anemia.” Mayo Clinic: “Anemia,” “Sickle Cell Anemia.” American Association for Clinical Chemistry: “Anemia.” St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital: “Hydroxyurea Treatment for Sickle Cell Disease.” Lupus Foundation of America: “What you need to know about anemia.” National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.