Hypotension is the medical term forlow blood pressure(less than 90/60). Ablood pressurereading appears as two numbers. The first and higher of the two is a measure of systolic pressure, or the pressure in thearterieswhen theheartbeats and fills them withblood. The second number measures diastolic pressure, or the pressure in the arteries when theheartrests between beats. Optimal blood pressure is less than 120/80 (systolic/diastolic). In healthy people, low blood pressure without any symptoms is not usually a concern and does not need to be treated. But low blood pressure can be a sign of an underlying problem -- especially in the elderly -- where it may cause inadequatebloodflow to the heart,brain, and other vital organs. Chronic low blood pressure with no symptoms is almost never serious. But health problems can occur when blood pressure drops suddenly and thebrainis deprived of an adequate blood supply. This can lead todizzinessor lightheadedness. Sudden drops in blood pressure most commonly occur in someone who's rising from a lying down or sitting position to standing. This kind of low blood pressure is known as postural hypotension or orthostatic hypotension. Another type of low blood pressure can occur when someone stands for a long period of time. This is called neurally mediated hypotension. Postural hypotension is considered a failure of the cardiovascular system or nervous system to react appropriately to sudden changes. Normally, when you stand up, some blood pools in your lower extremities. Uncorrected, this would cause your blood pressure to fall. But your body normally compensates by sending messages to your heart to beat faster and to your blood vessels to constrict. This offsets the drop in blood pressure. If this does not happen, or happens too slowly, postural hypotension results and can lead to fainting. The risk of both low andhigh blood pressurenormally increases with age due in part to normal changes during aging. In addition, blood flow to the heart muscle and thebraindeclines with age, often as a result of plaque buildup in blood vessels. An estimated 10% to 20% of people over age 65 have postural hypotension.  The cause of low blood pressure isn't always clear. It may be associated with the following: What Causes a Sudden Drop in Blood Pressure? Sudden drops in blood pressure can be life-threatening. Causes of this type of hypotension include: Who Gets Postural Hypotension? Postural hypotension, which is low blood pressure when standing up suddenly, can happen to anyone for a variety of reasons, such asdehydration, lack of food, or being overly fatigued. It can also be influenced by genetic make-up, aging, medication, dietary and psychological factors, and acute triggers, such as infection and allergy. Postural hypotension occurs most frequently in people who are taking drugs to controlhigh blood pressure(hypertension). It can also be related to pregnancy, strong emotions, hardening of the arteries (atherosclerosis), ordiabetes. The elderly are particularly affected, especially those who have high blood pressure or autonomic nervous system dysfunction. Hypotension after meals is a common cause ofdizzinessand falls after eating. This is most common after large meals containing a lot of carbohydrates. It’s believed to be caused by blood pooling into the vessels of thestomachandintestines. Several drugs are commonly associated with postural hypotension. These medications can be divided into two major categories: Common causes of naturally occurring postural hypotension include: Certain diseases can also cause postural hypotension. These include:  SOURCES: American Heart Association: "Low Blood Pressure." Ferri, F.Ferri's Clinical Advisor 2012Mosby, 2012. FDA: "Midodrine Update: February 8, 2012." Thaisetthawatkul P.Neurology2004. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute: "What Is Hypotension?" Libby, P and Bonow, R.Braunwald's Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, Saunders, 2007. Learn how to check your pulse, and how to lower it. Things you do each day could be harming your heart. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.