These itchy welts can show up anywhere on yourskin. They’re caused by an allergic or as a reaction to stress or viruses. Your doctor may call them urticaria. They can last a few minutes or several days before they go away. Sometimes they’re a sign of more serious problems, especially when you havetrouble breathing. With an outbreak of hives, you may notice: Hives that come back or that last more than 6 weeks are considered chronic urticaria and require further evaluation. If you havehivesalong with fever,nausea,stomachcramps, shortness of breath, and a drop inblood pressureafter abee sting,insect bite, or drug injection, that can be a sign of a life-threateningallergy. If your doctor has prescribed anepinephrineauto-injector for you, make sure you have two with you at all times. Use one and then call 911 or go to the hospital. Another reaction that sometimes happens along with hives is called angioedema. It’s swelling that develops under the skin. It often affects theeyesand lips, and sometimes the genitals, hands, and feet. It’s rare, but the swelling from angioedema can happen in your throat and causetrouble breathing. If that happens, use an auto-injector and call 911. They pop up when skin cells release a substance calledhistamine. It’s the start of the process we call anallergic reaction. Common triggers for hives include:  There’s one surefire way: Figure out what’s causing them and stay away from it. You can takeantihistaminesto ease your symptoms. If over-the-counter medicine doesn't help or your hives won’t go away, see your doctor. They may prescribesteroidpills or prescriptionantihistamines. At home, try these tips: SOURCES: American College of Asthma, Allergy and Immunology: "All About Hives." American Academy of Dermatology: "Hives." MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia: "Hives." UpToDate: "New-onset urticaria." Get help from methods that are medicine-free. What you should know before starting this treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.