Meningitisis a rare infection that affects the delicate membranes -- called meninges -- that cover thebrainand spinal cord. You or your children can catch it.    Bacterial meningitis It's an extremely serious illness. You or your child will need to get medical help right away. It can be life-threatening or lead tobrain damageunless you get quick treatment. Several kinds of bacteria can cause bacterial meningitis. The most common ones in the U.S. are: A bacteria calledHaemophilus influenzaetype b (Hib) was a common cause of meningitis in babies and young children until the Hibvaccinebecame available for infants. There are also vaccines forNeisseria meningitidisandStreptococcus pneumoniae.Experts recommend that all children get them, as well as all adults who are at a higher risk for the disease. In many cases, bacterial meningitis starts when bacteria get into your bloodstream from yoursinuses,ears, or throat. The bacteria travel through your bloodstream to your brain. The bacteria that cause meningitis can spread when people who are infectedcoughorsneeze. If you or your child has been around someone who has bacterial meningitis, ask your doctor what steps you should take to avoid catching it. Viral meningitis Viral meningitis is more common than the bacterial form and generally -- but not always -- is less serious. A number of viruses can trigger the disease, including several that can causediarrhea. Fungal meningitis Fungal meningitis is much less common than the bacterial or viral forms. Healthy people rarely get it. You’re more likely to get this form of meningitis if you have a problem with your immune system, likeAIDS. Parasitic meningitis Parasitic meningitis is also rare. It’s caused byparasitesthat usually affect animals. You can get it from eating animals like snails, slugs, snakes,fish, or poultry that are infected by parasites or their eggs, or produce that contains parasite eggs. The risk is higher with raw or undercooked foods. You can’t pass on this type of meningitis to other people. Amoebic meningitis Amoebic meningitis is a rare, usually fatal infection by a single-celled bug calledNaegleria fowleri. This amoeba lives in soil or warm, fresh water, but not salt water. People typically get it fromswimmingin water where the amoeba lives, not drinking it. Amoebic meningitis isn’t contagious. Non-infectious meningitis Non-infectious meningitis is caused by diseases likelupusorcancer, or if you’ve had ahead injury, brain surgery, or take certainmedications. It isn’t contagious. Chronic meningitis Chronic meningitis has similar symptoms as acute meningitis, but develops over a couple of weeks. It results from infections with a fungus or the mycobacteria that causetuberculosis. These organisms get into the tissue and fluid surrounding your brain to cause meningitis. Meningitis symptomscan develop within hours or days and may include: Symptoms of meningitis in infants In infants, meningitis symptoms may include:  Anyone can get meningitis, but research shows that it's more common in these age groups: Meningitis is more of a danger for people with certain medical conditions, such as a damaged or missingspleen, long-term disease, orimmune system disorders. Because certain germs that cause meningitis can spread easily, outbreaks are most likely to happen in places where people live close to each other. College students in dorms or military recruits in barracks can be more likely to catch the disease. So are people who travel to areas where meningitis is more common, such as parts of Africa. Meningitis almost always results from a bacterial orviral infectionthat begins somewhere else in your body, like yourears,sinuses, or throat. Less common causes of meningitis include:  Your doctor will ask about your medical history and do aphysical exam, including checking your neck for stiffness and looking for a skin rash that might suggest a bacterial infection. They will also need to do tests that can include:  Your treatment will depend on the type of meningitis you have. Bacterial meningitis needs treatment withantibioticsright away. The doctor might give you a general, or broad-spectrum, antibiotic even before they’ve found the exact bacteria that caused your illness. Once they do, they’ll change to a drug that targets the specific bacteria they find with the spinal tap. You might also get corticosteroids to easeinflammation. Viral meningitis usually goes away on its own without treatment. Your doctor might tell you to stay in bed, drink plenty of fluids, and take over-the-counterpainmedicines if you have a fever or aches. If a virus likeherpesorinfluenzacaused your illness, you might take antiviral medication. Antifungal medications can treat fungal meningitis. There is a possibility of being hospitalized if you are dehydrated or have severe symptoms.  Meningitis can cause severe complications in adults and children, especially if you delay treatment. Possible complications include:  You may be able to prevent meningitis by avoiding infection with the viruses or bacteria that cause it. These infections are passed to others when you cough,sneeze, kiss, or sharetoothbrushesor eating utensils. Take these steps to prevent infections:  SOURCES: Shmaefsky, B.Meningitis (Deadly Diseases and Epidemics), 2004. Journal of Emergency Medicine: “Marked elevation of cerebrospinal fluid white blood cell count: An unusual case ofStreptococcus pneumoniaemeningitis, differential diagnosis, and a brief review of current epidemiology and treatment recommendations.” Drugs: “Bacterial meningitis in children: critical review of current concepts.” Southern Medical Journal: “Clinical description and follow-up investigation of human West Nile virus cases.” Mayo Clinic: “Meningitis.” National Library of Medicine: “Meningitis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Meningitis.” CDC: “Bacterial Meningitis,” “Viral Meningitis,” “Fungal Meningitis,” “Parasitic Meningitis,” “Amebic Meningitis,” “Non-Infectious Meningitis.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.