Down syndromeis a genetic condition that causes mild to serious physical and developmental problems. People with Down syndrome are born with an extrachromosome. Chromosomes are bundles of genes, and your body relies on having just the right number of them. With Down syndrome, this extra chromosome leads to a range of issues that affect you both mentally and physically. Down syndrome is a lifelong condition. Although it can’t be cured, doctors know more about it now than ever. If your child has it, getting the right care early on can make a big difference in helping them live a full and meaningful life. Down syndrome can have many effects, and it’s different for each person. Some will grow up to live almost entirely on their own, while others will need more help taking care of themselves. Mental abilities vary, but most people with Down syndrome have mild to moderate issues with thinking, reasoning, and understanding. They’ll learn and pick up new skills their whole lives, but they may take longer to reach important goals like walking, talking, and developing social skills. People with Down syndrome tend to have certain physical features in common. These may include: Many people with Down syndrome don’t have any other health issues, but some do. Common conditions includeheartproblems and trouble hearing and seeing. For most people, each cell in your body has 23 pairs of chromosomes. One chromosome in each pair comes from your mother and the other comes from your father. But with Down syndrome, something goes wrong and you get an extra copy of chromosome 21. That means you have three copies instead of two, which leads to the symptoms of Down syndrome. Doctors aren’t sure why this happens. There’s no link to anything in the environment or anything the parents did or didn’t do. While doctors don’t know what causes it, they do know that women 35 and older have a higher chance ofhaving a babywith Down syndrome. If you’ve already had a child with Down syndrome, you’re more likely to have another one who has it as well. It’s not common, but it is possible to pass Down syndrome from parent to child. Sometimes, a parent has what experts call “translocated” genes. That means some of their genes aren’t in their normal place, perhaps on a different chromosome from where they’d usually be found. The parent doesn’t have Down syndrome because they have the right number of genes, but their child may have what’s called “translocation Down syndrome.” Not everyone with translocation Down syndrome gets it from their parents -- it may also happen by chance. There are three types of Down syndrome: You can’t tell what type of Down syndrome someone has just by how they look. The effects of all three types are very similar, but someone with mosaic Down syndrome may not have as many symptoms because fewer cells have the extra chromosome. A doctor may suspect Down syndrome in anewbornbased on the baby’s appearance. That can be confirmed by abloodtest called a karyotype test that lines up the chromosomes and will show if there’s an extra chromosome 21. Routine tests done duringpregnancycan check if it’s likely yourbabyhas Down syndrome. If those results are positive, or if you’re at high risk, you may choose to have additional, more invasive tests to be certain. In thefirst trimester, you may have: In thesecond trimester, you may have: Other kinds of tests can diagnose Down syndrome before your baby is born by checking a sample of their DNA for an extra chromosome 21: There’s no specific treatment for Down syndrome. But there is a wide range of physical and developmental therapies designed to help people with Down syndrome reach their full potential. The earlier you start them, the better. Each child will have different needs. Yours may benefit from: You’ll also work closely with your child’s doctor to watch for and manage any health problems associated with the condition. Babies with Down syndrome may be born with other physical problems, and they’re at higher risk for certain health issues later in life. Possible complications of Down syndrome include: SOURCES: National Institutes of Health: “The Genetic Basics: What Are Genes and What Do They Do?,” “Learning about Down Syndrome.” KidsHealth: “Down Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: “Down Syndrome.” National Health Service (U.K.): “Down’s Syndrome.” CDC: “Facts about Down Syndrome.” March of Dimes: “Down Syndrome.” MassGeneral Hospital for Children: “Translocation Down Syndrome.” U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Down syndrome.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.