Mononucleosisis an infectious illness that’s usually caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). It’s also called mono or “the kissing disease.” You can get the virus through kissing as well as things like sharing drinks or silverware. It’s contagious, but you’re less likely to catch mono than other common illnesses like acold. Mono isn’t usually a serious illness, but you can have complications that make it more dangerous. The symptoms of mono can range from mild to severe. You may not be able to take part in your normal daily activities for several weeks. Many people are exposed to EBV as kids. But that doesn’t always mean you’ll get mono. You can carry the virus in your body for your entire life without ever having symptoms of mono. EBV is part of theherpesvirus family. Most people are exposed to it at some point in their lives. In the U.S., about 85% to 90% of adults carry the virus by the time they’re 40. EBV spreads through bodily fluids, usuallysaliva, which is why you can get it throughkissing. You can also get it if you share food, drinks, or silverware with a person who has it or, rarely, if an infected personcoughsor sneezes near you. If someone who has mono uses an object like a fork or spoon, the virus is probably still contagious as long as the object is still moist. EBV can be spread throughbloodandsemen. It’s unusual, but you can get mono from medical procedures such as blood transfusions andorgan transplants, or through sexual contact. Mono can cause different symptoms in different people. If you get EBV, you may start to have symptoms of mono within about 4 to 7 weeks. Common symptoms include: Some people have no symptoms or ones that are so mild, they don’t notice them. Most people who get mono feel better in about 2 to 4 weeks. Sometimes,fatiguecan last several weeks after that. In some cases, it can take 6 months or longer for the symptoms to go away. Your doctor can usually diagnose mono based on your symptoms. They might also check for swelling in yourtonsils,lymph nodes, andliverorspleen. They can confirm a mono diagnosis with blood tests including:  Complications from mono can be serious. They might include: You’re more likely to have serious complications from mono if your immune system is weakened because of an illness likeHIVorAIDS, or because you take certainmedications. No medications treat mono.Antibioticsand antivirals don’t work on EBV. Things that may help you feel better include:  There’s novaccineto prevent mono. EBV can stay in your saliva for months after you’re infected, so even if you don’t have symptoms or feel sick, you may be able to spread it. To lower your chances of getting mono,wash your handsoften and try not to share things like drinks, silverware, ortoothbrusheswith other people. Photo Credit: Biophoto Associates / Science Source SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Mononucleosis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Mononucleosis.” KidsHealth.org: “Mononucleosis.” CDC: “About Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV).” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Infectious Mononucleosis.” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Mononucleosis (Mono).” American Association for Clinical Chemistry: “Mononucleosis (Mono) Test.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Infectious Mononucleosis.” National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Hemolytic Anemia.” Medline Plus / National Library of Medicine – Photo Caption Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – Photo Caption © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.