The middle ear is a small space behind the ear drum that is supposed to be well ventilated by air that normally passes up from behind the nose, through the Eustachian tube, keeping the middle ear clean and dry. When there is not enough fresh air ventilating the middle ear, such as when the Eustachian tube is clogged or blocked, the area becomes damp, stagnant, and warm, a perfect breeding ground for germs. In children and infants, the Eustachian tube is often too soft or immature and has a harder time staying open. Allergies, post nasal drainage,sinusinfections,common coldviruses andadenoidproblems can all interfere with the Eustachian tube’s ability to let air pass into the middle ear. When the doctor looks at the eardrum, he or she will see that it is red, often bulging, and be able to make the diagnosis of an ear infection.  For children, the most common trigger of an ear infection is an upper respiratoryviral infection, such as a cold or theflu. These disorders can make the Eustachian tube so swollen that air can no longer flow into the middle ear.Allergies-- topollen, dust, animal dander, or food -- can produce the same effect as a cold orflu, as can smoke, fumes, and other environmental toxins. Bacteria can cause an ear infection directly, but usually these organisms come on the heels of a viral infection or anallergic reaction, quickly finding their way into the warm, moist environment of the middle ear. Invading bacteria can wreak major havoc, turning inflammation into infection and provokingfevers. Among the bacteria most often found in infected middle ears are the same varieties responsible for many cases ofsinusitis, pneumonia, and other respiratory infections. According to the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (ear, nose, and throat physicians), the conjugate pneumococcal vaccine is very effective against several strains of the most common bacteria that cause ear infections. Thisvaccineis routinely given to infants andtoddlersto preventmeningitis, pneumonia, andbloodinfections. Your child’s doctor should advise you on the use of this vaccine, which may help to prevent at least some ear infections. Ear infections occur in various patterns. A single, isolated case is called an acute ear infection (acute otitis media). If the condition clears up but comes back as many as three times in a 6-month period (or four times in a single year), the person is said to have recurrent ear infections (recurrent acute otitis media). This usually indicates the Eustachian tube isn't working well. A fluid buildup in the middle ear without infection is termed otitis media with effusion, a condition where fluid stays in the ear because it is not well ventilated, but germs have not started to grow. In recent years, scientists have identified the characteristics of people most likely to suffer recurrent middle ear infections:  Remove as many environmental pollutants from your home as you can, including: Also, reduce your or your child's exposure to people withcolds, and control allergies. Taking steps to preventcolds, theflu, and other illnesses can prevent some, but not all, ear infections. Here are some important things to do: Because formula-fed babies are more likely to get ear infections, it is better tobreastfeedyour infant for the first 6 to 12 months, if possible, to preventear infections. SOURCES:American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery. Academy of American Family Physicians. Merck. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. Things to try at home to help ease the pain. Allergies or earwax buildup may be to blame. Learn what to do. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.