Hay feveris an allergic reaction to certain things. Common triggers include pollen, ragweed, and cats. Also known asallergic rhinitis, there are two types: seasonal, which happens only during the time of year in which certain plants pollinate, and perennial, which happens year-round. Typically, if you suffer from hay fever in the spring, you're probably allergic to tree pollens. Grass and weed pollens may be causing yourallergic reactionduring the summer. In autumn, ragweed pollen may plague you, and fungus spores cause problems primarily from late March through November but can be present year-round. People with year-round (perennial) hay fever are usually allergic to one or more allergens found indoors. These include housedust mites, feathers, and animal dander (the tinyskinflakes animals such as cats and dogs shed along with fur), all of which may be found in pillows, bedding, heavy draperies, upholstery, and carpeting. Another common allergen,mold, is usually found in damp areas such as bathrooms and basements. If you have hay fever (allergic rhinitis), it's because your immune system views harmless inhaledpollenor other allergens as dangerous substances invading the body. Your system overreacts, flooding your bloodstream with chemicals likehistamineand leukotrienes. These inflame the lining of your nasal passages,sinuses, and eyelids and also set in motion other symptoms associated with hay fever, such as: All of these symptoms are meant to protect your body either by trapping and expelling the allergen or by swelling body areas, such as the nasal passages, so the allergen can't enter. As a result of congestion in the veins in the lining of yoursinuses, dark circles, commonly known as allergic shiners, may appear under youreyes. If you have perennial allergic rhinitis, they may be present all year round. The swelling of your nasal membranes may also close the sinus drainage openings, causingsinusitis. Rhinitis may also be associated withnasal polyps-- small, non-cancerous growths. Andnosebleedscan occur during hay fever attacks. Hay fever is often an inherited trait (genetically determined). Most people with hay fever have a parent or sibling who also hasallergies. People with asthma or eczema (allergicdermatitis) are more likely than others to develop hay fever; and about one-third of those with allergic rhinitis also have at least mild, intermittent,allergic asthma. See a doctor if: Many people try to live without treating hay fever, but treatment can help ease your symptoms. Getting help for your symptoms early can put you on the right track for improving your allergies. Before you see the doctor, think about when and where your symptoms show up.  For example: If your symptoms go away after about a week, you could have a cold and not an allergy. It may take several tries to ease your symptoms. First, you should stay away from triggers as much as you can. Second, you should take the medicines your doctor suggests or prescribes as directed. That will help them work better. Corticosteroid nasal sprays.You can use them long-term to treat symptoms like itching, runny nose, and congestion. They usually provide relief within 12 hours of your first dose. They include budesonide, fluticasone, and mometasone. Antihistamines.These are pills, nose sprays, and eye drops that work best on hay fever symptoms like runny nose, sneezing, and itchy eyes and skin. Options include cetirizine, fexofenadine, and loratadine. These are often preferable to older products (your doctor may call them first-generation antihistamines), which typically cause drowsiness. Decongestants.They help relieve the swelling inside your nose that makes it stuffy. Don't use nose drops and sprays longer than 5 days. Your nose gets used to them and congestion returns. Your doctor may call this rebound swelling. Cromolyn sodium.Use this OTC nasal spray several times a day to stop the release of histamines. It works best when you start before symptoms show up. Leukotriene modifier.This medicine hinders leukotrienes, chemicals in your immune system that cause your body to make extra mucus.  A leukotriene modifier like montelukast can help when allergy symptoms come with mild asthma. Nasal ipratropium.This prescription nose spray helps stop an extra-runny nose but doesn't do much for symptoms like congestion or sneezing. Don't take it if you've been diagnosed with glaucoma or an enlarged prostate gland. This treatment aims to make your body less reactive. It doesn't work for every allergen. It seems to help most with common environmental triggers. The first step is to find out what you're allergic to. Your doctor will do this with a skin prick test or by injecting small doses of the allergen under your skin. When you react, you're allergic to that substance. After that, you'll get shots with small doses of the things you're allergic to -- usually one at a time. Your doctor will slowly increase the dose until you get to the largest amount you can tolerate. You must visit your doctor regularly, often weekly, for as many as 2 to 5 years. In 2014, the FDA approved sublingual immunotherapy for treatment of grass and ragweed pollens. It works by placing a tablet or liquid under the tongue daily. It's best to begin this therapy several months before allergy season begins. You can ease your allergy symptoms by avoiding or reducing your exposure to triggers. For seasonal allergies, you should: For perennial allergies to indoor animals and pests: Saline rinses.They can ease nasal congestion and wash allergens and extra mucus out of your nose. You can use a premixed solution in a squeeze bottle or a neti pot. Use distilled, sterile, or boiled water if you decide to make the saline mixture yourself. Use purified water to rinse and sterilize the bottle or neti pot after each use. Let them air dry. Bioelectronic sinus device.This works by using microcurrents to stimulate nerve fibers in your sinuses. Sold over-the-counter, it helps reduce sinus inflammation, pain, and congestion. Herbal remedies.There's some evidence that a shrub called butterbur may help hay fever symptoms. The raw plant can be toxic. Choose a product labeled “PA-free.” Other herbal remedies include capsicum, honey, vitamin C, and fish oil, but more research is needed to know how well they work.  Some people use acupuncture to treat hay fever. Although there's no cure for hay fever, if you work with your doctor, stick to your treatment plan, and avoid the triggers for your seasonal and perennial allergies, you can manage your symptoms before they manage you. SOURCES: News release, Sanofi-aventis U.S. Golightly L.Drugs. 2005. Taramarcaz P.Clinical and Experimental Allergy, December, 2004. laiss M.Clinical Therapy, November 2004. Berger W.Paediatric Drugs,2004. Huggins, J.American Family Physician, August 15, 2004. Bousquet J.Allergy, 2004. Incaudo, G.Clinical Review of Allergy Immunology, October 2004. Wilsom, A.American Journal of Medicine, March 1, 2004. MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia: “Hay Fever.” MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia: "Allergy." American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology: “Allergies: Seasonal Allergies,” “Types of Allergies: Allergic Rhinitis.” “Allergic Rhinitis.” National Health Service Choices: “Hay fever.” American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology: “Rhinitis (Hay Fever),” “Hay Fever and Allergy Medications.” Mayo Clinic: “Hay Fever,” “Dark Circles Under Eyes.” Medscape: “Allergic Rhinitis.” PubMed Health: “Hay Fever and Dust Mite Allergies: Allergen-specific immunotherapy,” “Hay Fever and Dust Mite Allergies: Allergic rhinitis: Non-drug interventions,” “Hay Fever and Dust Mite Allergies: Medication for the relief of allergic rhinitis,” “What Kind of allergy tests are there?” FDA news release: “Fighting Allergy Season with Medications.” FDA.gov: “Allergies,” “Is Rinsing Your Sinuses Safe?” UpToDate: “Patient Information: Allergic rhinitis (seasonal allergies) (Beyond the Basics) Seidman, M.D.Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery, February 2015. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases: “Pollen Allergy,” “Diagnosis of Environmental Allergies,” “Immunotherapy for Environmental Allergies.” Ohio State University Wexler Medical Center, Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery: “Allergy Medications.” American Academy of Family Physicians: "Allergies: Things You Can Do to Control Your Symptoms." Talal M. Nsouli, MD, director, Watergate and Burke Allergy and Asthma Centers; consultant, White House Medical Office; Clinical Professor of Pediatrics and Allergy/Immunology, Georgetown University School of Medicine.  Get help from methods that are medicine-free. What you should know before starting this treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.