Once you know you have osteoporosis, you have many options for treating the condition and strengthening your bones to prevent fractures. Talk to your doctor about what’s most likely to help you. You may try a few different approaches at once, including medications, changing your diet and exercise habits, and other lifestyle choices. If your doctor thinks you might haveosteoporosis, they may start by measuring your height to see if you’ve gotten shorter. The bones of the spine are often the first ones affected by the condition, which can change how tall you are. Your doctor may also recommend a test to measure your bone density. One test called aDEXA scan(dual energy X-ray absorptiometry)is the most common tool used to measure bone density and diagnosebone lossand osteoporosis at an early stage. Quantitative computed tomography is another method, but it uses higher levels ofradiationthan other bone density tests.Ultrasound, which typically tests the heel of your foot, can also detect earlysigns of osteoporosis. In addition to these bone density tests, your doctor might takebloodor urine samples and test them to see if you have another disease that’s causing bone loss. Althoughosteoporosisis sometimes diagnosed by accident after you’ve had an X-ray for a fracture or an illness, it’s not a very useful tool for early screening. The goal of most osteoporosis medicines is to help your bones stay as strong as possible. But each of them works in different ways: Bisphosphonates, likealendronate(Binosto,Fosamax),ibandronate acid(Boniva), andrisedronic acid(Actonel,Atelva) treat osteoporosis by keeping the body from breaking down bone. You take Boniva once a month, while the others can be taken weekly. If you take these medicines incorrectly, they can lead to ulcers in youresophagus, so it’s important to follow the instructions exactly. Zoledronic acid(Reclast,Zometa) is a once-yearly 15-minute infusion you get through a vein. It is a bisphosphonate that can increase bone strength and reduce fractures in the hip, spine, wrist, arm, leg, or rib. The most common side effects include bone pain,nausea, andvomiting. People whose kidneys don’t work very well should avoid it or use it with caution. Raloxifene(Evista) is an osteoporosis treatment that acts like the hormone estrogen and can help maintain bone mass. But studies have shown that it doesn't have some of the downsides of estrogen, like increasing the risk ofbreastor uterine cancers. Evista often causeshot flashesand makes you more likely to haveblood clots. Abaloparatide(Tymlos) orteriparatide(Forteo) treat osteoporosis in postmenopausal women and men who are more likely to get severe fractures. It’s a man-made form of theparathyroid hormonethat your body produces, and is the first drug shown to make the body form new bone and increasebone mineral density. You take it as a daily injection for up to 2 years. Side effects include nausea, legcramps, anddizziness. Romosozumab-aqqg(Evenity) is a monoclonal antibody used to treat osteoporosis in postmenopausal women at high risk of fracture. It blocks the effects of the protein sclerostin and works mainly by increasing new bone formation. It is taken by injection once a month with a limit of 12 doses. Denosumab(Prolia, Xgeva)treats osteoporosis by interfering with the body's bone-breakdown process. It's for women with a higher chance of fracture who’ve tried other osteoporosis drugs that have not worked. Side effects can include pain in the back, arms, and legs. You get an injection of this drug twice a year. Hormone replacement therapy(HRT) -- eitherestrogenalone or a combination ofestrogenand progestin -- is approved for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis in women. The Women’s Health Initiative study found that whileestrogenlowers women’s chances for fractures, it may make them more likely to have other health problems.Conjugated estrogens/medroxyprogesterone acetate(Prempro), one type of combinationhormone replacement therapy, was shown to increase some women’s chances ofbreast cancer,heartdisease, andstroke. However,Premarinalone did not increasebreast cancerrisk. So while HRT may help preserve bone and prevent fractures in postmenopausal women, your doctor may want you to use other medications first. Talk with your doctor about HRT and its benefits and risks. Your diet is an important part of treating and preventing osteoporosis, especially getting enough calcium to build and maintain strong bones. Eat plenty of calcium-rich foods, such as nonfat or low-fat milk, low-fat yogurt, broccoli, cauliflower, salmon, tofu, and leafy green vegetables. One glass of skim milk has the same amount of calcium as whole milk: 300 milligrams. Women through age 50 should get 1,000 milligrams of calcium each day. Older women need 1200 milligrams a day. For men, the recommended amount of calcium is 1,000 milligrams per day between ages 25 and 70 and 1,200 milligrams per day from age 71 and up. Your body also needs vitamin D to absorb calcium and move it into and out of bones. Adults ages 19-70 need 600 international units per day and those 71 and older need 800 international units per day. Fatty fish like salmon and tuna are good sources. But not many other foods are rich in vitamin D, so you may need to take a supplement to get enough. Because calcium supplements can keep the body from absorbing certain drugs, check with your doctor before you start taking them if you are on any medications. You may need to take the supplements at a different time of day from your other meds. Along with foods that are naturally rich in calcium, there are other ways to get more of it in your diet: Exercise is a key way to keep bones strong. Make sure you get two main types: To get the most benefit, you should try to do your workouts at least three times per week for 30-45 minutes, but even doing a little at a time helps. Swimmingand bicycle riding, although good exercises for your heart, don’t seem to be as helpful inpreventing osteoporosisbecause they're not weight bearing -- they don’t make your bones work and get stronger. It’s important to recognize that osteoporosis can take an emotional toll and to get treatment for that too.Depressionis common in people with this disease. Osteoporosis can damage your self-image. You may see yourself as fragile, and be too scared of breaking a bone to do activities you’ve always enjoyed. If spinal compression fractures have caused a serious rounding of your upper back, you might not like the way you look. Consider therapy or a support group. The National Osteoporosis Foundation sponsors local support groups called Building Strength Together. You can find one, join one, or start one on their website. And the same exercise that keeps your bones strong can also boost your mood. SOURCES: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases:"The NIH Osteoporosis and Related Bone Diseases -- National Resource Center," "Osteoporosis: Peak Bone Mass in Women." National Osteoporosis Association: "Osteoporosis: The Bone Thief." MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia: "Osteoporosis." MayoClinic.com: "Bone density test: Measure your risk of osteoporosis." U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: "Screening for Osteoporosis." National Osteoporosis Foundation: "Facts on Osteoporosis," “NOF Support Groups.” News release, FDA. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: "Bone Health and Osteoporosis: A Report of the Surgeon General, 2004." National Women’s Health Network: “Osteoporosis -- Fact Sheet.” Harvard Medical School: “Osteoporosis Drugs: Which One Is Right for You?” National Institutes of Health. UpToDate. Reduce bone loss and build stronger muscles. Calcium-rich foods to add to your diet. Get the facts on osteoporosis. Causes, symptoms, risk factors, and treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.