Upper limbspasticityis a condition that affects the way you move your arms. It makes your muscles stiff and flexed. Sometimes, your arms willtwitchor move in a way you can’t control, called a spasm. Spasticity happens after your body’snervous systemhas been damaged, usually by astroke, disease, or injury. It’s not life-threatening, but it can be painful and have a big effect on your daily life. Some tasks, like getting dressed or bathing, become hard. But the outlook for treating upper limb spasticity is better than it has ever been. There are many treatments that can make your muscles more flexible and give you better control of your arm movements. If your symptoms improve, you may be able to reduce your treatment. Your muscles move when they get electrical signals from the nerves that branch throughout your body.These signals come from your spinal cord andbrain. When yourbrainor spinal cord is damaged, they don’t send those signals the right way. The uneven signaling causes your muscles to flex, stiffen, and twitch. There are several things that can damage yourbrainor nervous system and lead to upper limb spasticity. You may not have any symptoms of upper limb spasticity until weeks, months, or even years after you have astrokeor brain injury. The condition can cause: Without treatment, your muscles can seem frozen in these positions. Spasms and stiffness can make it very hard to do normal tasks like dressing yourself. If you notice muscle tightness, spasms, or stiff limbs at any time after you’ve had astrokeor brain injury, you should tell your doctor right away. You’ll need to see a neurologist, a specialist who treats problems with the brain and nervous system. They’ll give you aphysical examand test your muscle movement to see how well you can control your arms, elbows, wrists, and hands. They’ll flex your joints to see how limber they are. They may ask you to move your arms on your own to see how much control you have. The doctor will also ask you questions about your symptoms, like: Your doctor may also use a test calledelectromyography, or EMG, to see how well your arm muscles and nerves are working. For this test, you’ll sit or lie down, and a technician will put electrodes on your arms. The electrodes have small needles that go into your muscles, and they’re attached by wires to a machine that can measure the electricity in your muscles and nerves. Your doctor will ask you to slowly flex and relax your arms so the machine can record the activity. They may also inject a drug to briefly numb the area where you have spasms to see if they still happen when you can’t move your muscles. The test can take 30 minutes to an hour. You’ll want to find out as much as you can about your condition so you can learn how to control it and feel better. You might want to ask: The goal of treatments for upper limb spasticity is to keep your muscles from becoming too stiff and give you more freedom to move your arms. It’s important to get therapy so you can keep moving your muscles and stop them from getting stiffer and more painful. Your doctor will recommend a treatment based on how healthy you are and the symptoms you have. There are several options that may work for you. If your condition gets better, you may be able to reduce your treatment. It’s important to stick to your therapy plan and tell your doctor about any changes in how you feel. Along with treatment, there are things you can do to keep your muscles and joints as flexible as possible. Without treatment, upper limb spasticity can make your muscles stiffer and more painful over time. But new treatments can give you better control of your arms and help you live an active life. Your physical therapist or occupational therapist can help you find ways to increase your flexibility or find new, easier ways to do tasks. Find helpful information and support from organizations like theAmerican Stroke Association(ASA). You can find stroke support groups in your area or to join a group online. Call the ASA at 888-478-7653 to be connected to a trained volunteer who can provide support or offer advice. SOURCES: American Stroke Association: “Spasticity.” American Stroke Association: “What Is Stroke?” Wake Forest University Baptist Medical Center: “New Hope for the Treatment of Upper Limb Spasticity.” American Association of Family Physicians: “Upper Limb Spasticity.” National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Spasticity Information Page.” University of Miami Miller School of Medicine: “Rehabilitation of Moderate to Severe TBI: Movement Disorders, Spasticity and Contractures.” University of Vermont Fletcher Allen Health Care: “Spasticity.” University of Vermont Fletcher Allen Health Care: “Spasticity Treatment.” Central Peninsula Hospital (Arkansas): “Caring for Muscle Spasticity or Spasms.” American Stroke Association: “Finding Support: You Are Not Alone.” Business Wire. “Ipsen announces FDA approval of Dysport® (abobotulinumtoxinA) for injection in the treatment of upper limb spasticity in adults in the United States.”  Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.