A vaccination schedule is a plan with recommendations for which vaccines your children should get and when they should get them.Vaccinesare one of the most important ways to prevent children from getting some dangerous diseases. By exposing you to a germ in a controlled way, vaccines teach your body to recognize and fight it. Government vaccine recommendations are just that -- recommendations. You aren’t forced to get them. But state laws require your kids to have certain vaccines before they can go to daycare, school, or college, with some exceptions. Vaccines protect not just your child, but everyone they come in contact with. The more people who get vaccinated, the harder it is for a disease to spread. Before they’re approved for use and added to the schedule, vaccines go through years of testing to make sure they work and that they’re safe. The government keeps track of any reports of side effects to make sure no problems come up. These are thevaccinesrecommended for children, and the diseases they protect against: If you still have questions, talk to your baby's doctor about your concerns. Your doctor will provide you with literature about each vaccine that you can review and discuss with the doctor before your baby is vaccinated. PROTECTS AGAINST  Dose 1:age 2 months Dose 2:age 4 months Dose 3:age 6 months Dose 4:Between ages 15 months and 18 months Dose 5:Between ages 4 years and 6 years Every year, starting at age 6 months Extra doserecommended for children under age 9 the first year they receive this vaccine Dose 1:Between ages 12 months and 23 months Dose 2:6 months to 18 months after first dose Catch-up seriesfor those ages 2 years and older who have not already completed the HepA series. Two doses may be given, separated by at least 6 months. Dose 1:At birth Dose 2:Between ages 1 month and 2 months Dose 3:Between ages 6 months and 18 months Catch-up seriesbetween ages 7 years and 18 years if your child has not received all three doses Dose 1:age 2 months Dose 2:age 4 months Dose 3:age 6 months, if needed Dose 4:Booster between ages 12 months and 15 months Catch-up vaccine(s)after age 15 months, if needed Doses 1-3between ages 11 years and 12 years for both boys and girls Catch-up seriesbetween ages 13 years and 18 years if needed Human papillomavirus, which can causecervical cancerin women andgenital wartsin both men and women  Dose 1: age 2 months Dose 2:age 4 months Dose 3:Between ages 6 months and 18 months Dose 4:Between ages 4 years and 6 years Catch-up seriesbetween ages 7 years and 18 years if your child has not received all four doses Dose 1:age 2 months Dose 2:age 4 months Dose 3:age 6 months Dose 4:Between ages 12 months and 15 months Extra doseof PCV13 recommended for children ages 24 months through 71 months with certain health conditions Extra doseis recommended for previously unvaccinated children with immune conditions ages 6 years through 18 years Dosebetween ages 11 years and 12 years, with a booster at age 16 years Catch-up dosebetween ages 13 years and 15 years, if needed, with a booster between ages 16 years and 18 years For children with high-risk conditions, a dose is recommended between ages 9 months and 10 years Meningococcal disease, which can causebacterial meningitisand lead to loss of limbs, disabilities,deafness,seizure,stroke, and death  Dose 1:Between ages 12 months and 15 months Dose 2:Between ages 4 years and 6 years Catch-up seriesbetween ages 7 years and 18 years if your child has not had both doses Dose 1:age 2 months Dose 2:age 4 months Dose 3:age 6 months, if needed, depending on the vaccine manufacturer of the previous doses Single doserecommended between ages 11 years and 12 years Catch-up dosebetween ages 7 years and 10 years if your child has not had all five doses of DTaP Check whether additional dose is needed between ages 13 years and 18 years Dose 1:Between ages 12 months and 15 months Dose 2:Between ages 4 years and 6 years Catch-up seriesbetween ages 7 years and 18 years if your child has not received both doses  Chickenpox, which can lead to infectedblisters, bleeding disorders, brain swelling, and pneumonia   SOURCES: American Academy of Pediatrics: "Recommended Immunization Schedule for Persons Aged 0 Through 6 Years." American Academy of Pediatrics: "Protection from Rotavirus." American Academy of Pediatrics: "Polio Vaccine: What You Need to Know." American Academy of Pediatrics: "Movement: Birth to 3 Months." AboutKidsHealth: "Motor Development: The First Six Months." AboutKidsHealth: "Holding and Dressing Your Baby." American Academy of Pediatrics: "Car Safety Seats: Information for Families 2011." Nemours Foundation: "All About Sleep." CDC: “Vaccines for Your Children,” “State School and Childcare Vaccination Laws,” “Immunization Schedules,” “Measles,” “Mumps,” “Rubella,” “Hepatitis A,” “Meningococcal Disease,” “How Many Cancers Are Linked with HPV Each Year?” “Flu (Influenza).” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: “Vaccines Protect Your Community,” “Vaccine Safety.” KidsHealth.org: “Your Child’s Immunizations: Meningococcal Vaccines.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.