Vasculitis is a general term for several conditions that causeinflammationin yourbloodvessels. It’s also calledangiitisor arteritis. It can make your blood vessels weak, stretched, bigger, or narrower. They might close entirely. Vasculitis can affect people at any age. Some forms affect blood vessels that go to or supply specific organs like yourskin,eyes, orbrain. Other kinds might involve many organ systems at the same time. Some of these general forms could be mild and not need treatment. Others may be severe. Doctors don’t know what causes many cases of vasculitis. It might be linked to anallergic reactionto amedication. You can also get it after having an infection that sets off an unusual response in yourimmune system, damaging your blood vessels. Vasculitis also may be tied to immune system diseases that you’ve had for months or years, such asrheumatoid arthritis,lupus, orSjögren's syndrome. Vasculitis can be serious. When your blood vessel becomes weak, it might stretch and bulge (called ananeurysm). It might also burst open, causing bleeding. This can be life-threatening but is very rare. When your blood vessel becomes inflamed and narrowed, it might partially or totally block the blood flow to that area of your body. If you don’t have enough other blood vessels to supply the area, the tissue will die. This can happen in any part of your body. Vasculitis can have general symptoms likefever, loss of appetite, weight loss, andfatigue. It can also cause specific problems, depending on the body part that’s involved. If it’s your skin, you might have arash. If your nerves aren’t getting enough blood, you could have numbness and weakness. Vasculitis in your brain may cause astroke. You could have aheart attackif it affects yourheart.Inflammationin the vessels supplying blood to yourkidneycan lead to kidney failure. If you notice anything unusual, see your doctor right away. Types of vasculitis Doctors divide vasculitis into types, based on the size of the blood vessels involved: Your doctor will ask about your medical history and do aphysical exam. You’ll need tests to look for inflammation or to rule out other conditions. These may include: Treatment depends on what’s causing your vasculitis and which organs are affected. Vasculitis might go away on its own if it’s the result of an allergic reaction. But if crucial organs such as yourlungs, brain, or kidneys are involved, you need treatment right away. Your doctor will probably give you corticosteroid medications, also known assteroids, to fight inflammation. You might need to take them for a long time. Your doctor will watch you closely for side effects likehigh blood pressure, highblood sugar, andboneproblems. Other medications can help slow your immune system with milder side effects than steroids. These includemethotrexate(Rheumatrex,Trexall). A drug called tocilizumab (Actemra) blocks an inflammatory protein in your body. You might be able to use a lower dose of steroids if you take it at the same time. If you have anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis, your doctor may prescribeavacopan(Tavneos). Your outlook will depend on several things, including the type of vasculitis you have and how quickly you were diagnosed. With the right treatment, many people live long, productive lives. Once your vasculitis is under control, your doctor will slowly stop your medications. The goal is for you to be inremission-- when there aren’t any signs of the condition in your body -- or to be cured. You’ll need regular checkups to watch for long-term side effects of treatment, vasculitis flare-ups, and complications. Know the symptoms so you can alert your doctor right away. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Vasculitis.” The Johns Hopkins Vasculitis Center: “Types of Vasculitis.” Vasculitis Foundation: "Forms of Vasculitis,” "Vasculitis Statistics." American College of Rheumatology: “Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis: (Wegener’s).” “Vasculitis,” “Tocilizumab (Actemra).” The Johns Hopkins Vasculitis Center: "Rheumatoid Vasculitis Information." National Library of Medicine: "Vasculitis." UpToDate for Patients: "Patient Information: Rheumatoid Arthritis Treatment." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Vasculitis.” Arthritis Foundation: “Vasculitis.” Avoid these 6 common mistakes. Decrease pain, increase energy. How much do you know? Swelling, fatigue, pain, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.