Ventricular septal defect is a hole in the wall between the right and left ventricles of theheart. This abnormality usually develops before birth and is found most often in infants. Normally, deoxygenatedbloodfrom the body returns to the upper chamber of the right side of the heart called the right atrium.  It passes through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle, which pumps the blood to thelungsto absorb oxygen. After leaving the lungs, the oxygenated blood returns to the left side of the heart, to the left atrium.  It then passes through the mitral valve into the left ventricle, where it is pumped out to provide oxygen to all the tissues of the body. The ventricular septal defect may not be heard with a stethoscope until several days after birth. This is because a newborn's circulatory system changes during the first week, with a drop in the lung or pulmonary pressure creating the greater pressure differential between the 2 ventricles, which may increase the left-to-right shunt and produce an audible murmur. Ventricular septal defects are the most common congenital heart defects in infants No one knows what causes ventricular septal defects, but they probably come from a malformation of the heart that occurs while the infant is developing in the womb. The most common type of ventricular septal defect is the membranous variant. In this type, the hole is located below the aortic valve, which controls flow of blood from the left ventricle into the main artery of the body, the aorta. Small holes in the ventricular septum usually produce no symptoms but are often recognized by the child's health care provider when a loud heart murmur along the left side of the lower breast bone or sternum is heard. Large holes typically produce symptoms 1-6 months after an infant’s birth. The left ventricle begins to fail, producing the following symptoms: When a ventricular septal defect is not detected early in life, it can cause more severe problems and more severe symptoms as time goes on. The biggest concern is development of high pressure in the lungs (pulmonary hypertension). If the ventricular septal defect is not surgically closed, irreversible pulmonary hypertension can develop, and the child may no longer benefit from surgery. The following are typical symptoms of pulmonary hypertension: The skin turns faintly bluish when the tissues are not receiving quite enough oxygen. This condition is often termed "hypoxemia" or "hypoxia." Any of the following should be reported to your child's health care provider: An immediate visit to the nearest hospital emergency department is warranted if you notice any of the following in your infant: If a ventricular septal defect is noted before your baby leaves the hospital, several tests may be ordered before discharge. A ventricular septal defect is detected onphysical examinationby a systolic murmur audible with a stethoscope along the lower left sternal or breast bone border. It is related to the oxygenated blood “swishing” through the hole or VSD into the right ventricle. The presence of a hole in the heart can be confirmed by echocardiogram. This painless test usesultrasoundwaves to construct a moving picture of the heart. It can quantitate the size of the left-to-right shunt by enlargement of the left ventricle, pressure in the lungs, and actually estimate the degree of shunting by an empirical formula. Chest X-ray is useful to see if the overall heart size is enlarged, and may demonstrate evidence of fluid in the lungs or pulmonary congestion. Anelectrocardiogramis helpful to evaluate the sizes of the left and right ventricle.  If right ventricular hypertrophy is indicated, this may suggest pulmonary hypertension. Cardiac catheterizationmay be performed in certain circumstances. In some children with ventricular septal defect, the defect will close on its own as the child grows. If a larger ventricular septal defect is causing symptoms, your child's health care provider may prescribe medication. Larger ventricular septal defects do not close as the child grows. If it does not close, closing the heart surgically is necessary. Surgery is not usually performed in newborns because small defects will close spontaneously in 20%-25% of cases. The surgery also is more risky in the first few months of life; the risk of death from the operation is higher in the first 6 months of life. Doctors are also using devices that cover the defect, performed in the cardiac catheterization laboratory, not by open heart surgery. Women can do nothing duringpregnancyto prevent their babies from developing a ventricular septal defect. During the growth of a child, the defect may become smaller and close on its own. Several other conditions may result from ventricular septal defects. American Heart AssociationNational Center7272 Greenville AvenueDallas, TX 75231 MedlinePlus,Ventricular septal defectAmerican Heart Association,Ventricular Septal Defect (VSD) ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect,congenital heart defect, heart murmur,hole in the heart,leaking heart,left to right shunt,shunting,VSD,aortic regurgitation,endocarditis,pulmonary hypertension Author: Mark Merlin, DO, FACEP, Faculty/EMS Fellowship Director, Clinical Instructor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Morristown Memorial Hospital/Atlantic Health System.Coauthor(s): Kathryn L Hale, MS, PA-C, Medical Writer, eMedicine.com, Inc.Editors: Alan D Forker, MD, Program Director of Cardiovascular Fellowship, Professor of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Missouri at Kansas City School of Medicine; Francisco Talavera, PharmD, PhD, Senior Pharmacy Editor, eMedicine; Jonathan Adler, MD, Instructor, Department of Emergency Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General Hospital. Ventricular Septal Defectfrom eMedicineHealth. Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.