This test helps your doctor see inside your rectum andcolon(also called your large intestine). You might hear them call it CT colonography, or computed tomography, a kind of test that takes pictures of your insides. It’s most often used to look for small growths called polyps and to check for colon or rectal (colorectal)cancer. During a full colonoscopy, your doctor slides a thin, flexible tube into your rectum so they can see your colon. You’ll be asleep during the process. The doctor will use the light and camera on the end of the tube to look at the lining of your intestine. If the doctor sees polyps or changes in the tissue, they can take some out through the tube and check it forcancer. Your doctor doesn’t put a camera into your intestine for a CT colonography. You aren’t asleep during the test. Instead, the doctor uses a CT scanner and X-rays to make 3-D pictures of your intestine on a computer screen. Pretty much. You may have to change what you eat for a few days and take medicine to clean out your colon. You’ll need to drink a special contrast liquid before the test. It lines the inside of your intestine and makes it easier to see on the scans. Make sure your doctor knows about all of the medicine you take. That includesdrugsyou can get without a prescription, likevitamins, supplements, and herbs. The doctor may ask you to stop some of these for a short time before the test. Tell your doctor if you’ve had past reactions to the contrast liquid used during X-rays. Don’t get this test if you’repregnant. A trained technician will do the test. You won’t need to stay in the hospital for it. You’ll lie on a narrow table. First, you’ll be on your side while they put a short, thin tube into your rectum to fill your intestine with air. This helps expand and smooth it out. It may make your belly feel full, but it shouldn’t hurt. After the air is in, the table will slide into a big, doughnut-shaped ring. The technician will leave the room but will be able to see, hear, and talk to you the entire time. They may ask you to turn or hold your breath at different times. The machine may click and whir as the scans are done. The whole thing should take 10 to 15 minutes. You may feel bloated for a while and havegasas you pass the air out of your intestine. You can go back to your normaldiet. There are no activity limits. Your doctor will let you know when and how you’ll get the test results. Virtual colonoscopy has pros and cons: Pros: Cons:  SOURCES: Radiological Society of North America: “CT Colonography.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Virtual Colonoscopy.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Virtual Colonoscopy for Cancer Screening.” National Cancer Institute: “Computed Tomography (CT) Scans and Cancer,” “Virtual Colonoscopy.” The age people should begin getting routine screenings. What to expect when the cancer spreads to other areas. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.