This type ofanemiameans that your body doesn't have enough healthy redblood cellsbecause you're low invitamin B12. These cells transport oxygen throughout your body. You need vitamins -- including B12 -- to make them. When you don't have enough redblood cells, your body doesn’t get the oxygen it needs to work like it should.Anemiamay make you feel tired, weak, and short of breath. You can getvitamin B12 deficiencyanemia if you don't get enough vitamin B12 in your diet from foods like milk, eggs, and meat. You're more likely to be low in this vitamin if you're older, or you eat avegetarian diet. It can also happen if your body can't absorb enough of it from the foods you eat. Yourintestinesabsorb vitamin B12 from food. A protein yourstomachmakes called “intrinsic factor” helps your body absorb it. When you don't have enough, you have a type ofvitamin B12 deficiencyanemia called “pernicious anemia.” You can get pernicious anemia if: Your body also might not absorb enough vitamin B12 if: Anemia can make you feel tired and short of breath. Here are some other signs: Because these can also be symptoms of other conditions, see your doctor for a diagnosis. Your doctor will do aphysical examand might order one or more of these tests: Usually, vitamin B12 deficiency anemia is easy to treat with diet and vitaminsupplements. To increase the amount of vitamin B12 in your diet, eat more of foods that contain it, such as: Your doctor might recommend that you also take a vitamin B12 supplement. It comes in pills or a nasal spray. If you are very low in this vitamin, you can get higher-dose vitamin B12 shots. You may need to take vitamin B12 for the rest of your life. You might also need to get treated for the condition that causes your anemia. But increasing your vitamin B12 levels is a key thing you can do. If you let it go for too long, it can damage yourheart,brain, nerves, bones, and other organs in your body. With treatment, you should feel better and avoid any long-term problems.  SOURCES: Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Vitamin B12 Deficiency Anemia." Mayo Clinic: "Vitamin deficiency anemia: Diagnosis." "Vitamin deficiency anemia: Overview." "Vitamin deficiency anemia: Symptoms and causes." "Vitamin deficiency anemia: Treatment." National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "How Is Pernicious Anemia Diagnosed?" "How Is Pernicious Anemia Treated?" "What Causes Pernicious Anemia?" "What Is Pernicious Anemia?" National Institutes of Health: "Vitamin B12 Dietary Supplement Fact Sheet." University of Rochester Medical Center: "What Are Red Blood Cells?" © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.