Wartsareskingrowths that are caused by the human papillomavirus (HPV). There are more than 100 kinds of HPV, some of which can cause warts on the skin. HPV stimulates quick growth of cells on the skin's outer layer. In most cases, commonwartsappear on the fingers, near thefingernails, or on the hands. Certaintypes of HPVcan cause warts to appear in the genital area. Warts are caused through direct contact with HPV, which is contagious. HPV may spread by person-to-person contact or through direct contact with an object used by a person with the virus. The virus that causes warts also can spread to other places on the body of the person with warts.  In most cases, warts on the skin are harmless and may go away without treatment. That includes flat warts, though they may take a few months or even years to go away. However, genital warts should be evaluated by a doctor. Warts sometimes come back after treatment, and you may need more than one type of treatment. Although doctors try to clear warts quickly, most methods to remove them require multiple treatments. Treatments include: If you already have warts, you can prevent them from spreading by not picking at them. Consider covering warts with bandages. In addition, keep your hands as dry as possible. Warts are harder to control in moist environments. Never brush, comb, or shave areas where you have warts, since this can cause the virus to spread. Wash your hands thoroughly after touching any warts. To prevent genital warts, some of the steps you can take include: Photo Credit: Science Photo Library / Science Source SOURCES: American Academy of Dermatology. Cleveland Clinic: "HPV," "Flat Warts." Children's Health. DermNet NZ. American Academy of Dermatology Association. Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.