Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (WKS) is one name for two conditions that often happen together -- Wernickeencephalopathyand Korsakoff syndrome. Many doctors think of them as different stages of the same disease. They can happen if you don’t get enough vitamin B1, also called thiamine. Vitamin B1 helpsyour brainturn sugar into energy. When yourbrain and nervous systemdon’t get the amount they need, they don’t work as well. Wernicke encephalopathy typically comes on suddenly, and you’ll need treatment right away. Symptoms include confusion, loss of muscle coordination, and trouble with yourvision. Korsakoff syndrome happens more slowly. It’s a long-term, ongoing problem that damages the part of your brain that handles memory. The main signs of Wernicke encephalopathy are: You also may have problems with yourheartand blood vessels that can lead to: If you aren’t treated for Wernicke encephalopathy quickly, it can lead to Korsakoff syndrome. Symptoms of Korsakoff syndrome usually begin as the signs of Wernicke encephalopathy start to go away. The telltale sign is the loss of short-term memory. That also makes it hard for you to learn anything new or make new memories. You might talk to someone and seem like yourself. But a minute or two later, you won’t remember anything about it, not even who you spoke with. You may also have:  In many cases, the lack of vitamin B1 is caused by heavy, long-termalcoholuse. Over time, alcohol affects how well your body absorbs, stores, and uses it. It also can happen if you don’t get enough nutrients from your diet or if you have certain health problems. These other causes include: Men get Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome a little more often than women, and it typically happens in people ages 45-65. It's also more common in: These groups are more likely to abuse alcohol or not eat well. Typically, it’s based on aphysical exam, your health history, and some tests. Your doctor will also want to rule out other problems that could cause your symptoms. You may get:  The first step is to get plenty of vitamin B1. You’ll probably have it put directly into a vein through a needle in yourhandor arm (an IV). You might need to have this every day for several months. From there, it’s important to stay away from alcohol and eat abalanced diet. That’ll help keep symptoms from coming back. If it affects how you walk, you’ll likely needphysical therapy. Korsakoff syndrome typically can’t be reversed. In serious cases, it can causebrain damageand lead to problems with memory and your walk that don’t go away. Your recovery will depend mostly on how early you started treatment. If you catch and treat it early, you can make a full recovery, but it could take up to a year. Confusion and issues related to it are often the last symptoms to go away. SOURCES: Dementia.org: “Dementia Types: Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome.” NIH, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome Information Page.” NIH, National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences: “Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome.” Alzheimer Society of Canada: “Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome.” Alzheimer’s Association: “Korsakoff Syndrome.” Medscape: “Korsakoff Syndrome.” Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.