Naturopathic medicine is a system that uses natural remedies to help the body heal itself. It embraces many therapies, including herbs,massage,acupuncture,exercise, and nutritional counseling. Naturopathy was brought to the United States from Germany in the 1800s, but some of its treatments are centuries old. Today, it combines traditional treatments with some aspects of modern science. The goal of naturopathic medicine is to treat the whole person -- that means mind, body, and spirit. It also aims to heal the root causes of an illness -- not just stop the symptoms. A naturopathic doctor may spend 1 to 2 hours examining you. They’ll ask questions about your health history, stress levels, and lifestyle habits. They may order lab tests. Afterwards, they will typically discuss your personalhealth plan. Naturopathic medicine focuses on education and prevention, so your doctor may give you diet,exercise, orstress managementtips. They might usecomplementary medicine-- like homeopathy, herbal medicine, andacupuncture-- in addition to naturopathic treatments. They may also use touch, such as massage and pressure, to create balance in your body. This is called naturopathic manipulative therapy. You can find people who support naturopathic medicine in hospitals, clinics, community centers, and private offices. They fall into three groups, and they all have different educations and backgrounds: Before choosing a naturopathic practitioner, ask about their education or training and your state’s licensing requirements. Naturopathic medicine is used for a wide range of health issues. Some of the more common ones include: In some states, licensed naturopathic doctors can perform minor surgeries, like stitching up a small wound. They can prescribe certainmedications. And they might even serve as your primary care doctor. Naturopathic doctors may receive additional training in naturalchildbirth. You don’t have to be sick to try naturopathy. You may just want to boost your overall health or prevent an illness. Don’t use it for an emergency or issue that requires a visit to the hospital, like major surgery. Nor should it be used in place of conventional medicine for serious conditions, likecancerandheart disease. A few naturopathic treatments have known side effects and risks: Tell your doctor if you’re thinking about trying naturopathy. They can make sure the treatments are safe and don’t interact with any other drugs you’re taking. You shouldn’t stop or delay your conventional medical care because of naturopathic medicine. It may be an option for people who might not find relief for their chronic illness through traditional medicine. In some cases, you can use both conventional and naturopathic medicine to treat an illness. For example, naturopathic remedies may help ease theside effects of chemotherapy. But remember to tell your regular doctor about any naturopathic treatments you’re on. And, you should tell your naturopathic doctor about your conventional medications. That way, both providers can work as a team for your health. SOURCES: American Association of Naturopathic Medicine: “Definition of Naturopathic Medicine.” Mayo Clinic: “Complementary and Alternative Medicine.” Bastyr University: “About Naturopathic Medicine.” National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health: “Naturopathy” Council on Naturopathic Medical Education: “Frequently Asked Questions.” American Cancer Society: “Complementary and Alternative Methods and Cancer.” 6 health benefits of yoga. 10 relaxation techniques to try. Different hues may affect your mood, diet, and more. Learn why you are the way you are. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.