You probably get some signs that your period is coming. For most women, it’s no big deal -- maybe tenderbreastsor a taste for sweets. But for others, the days before their period are harder. If it messes with your daily life, you might havepremenstrual syndrome(PMS). Your period is a natural part of your life. And you can do anything you would do any other time of the month. If PMS is a problem for you, there are ways to manage it. PMS is a group of changes that can affect you on many levels. They can be physical, emotional, or behavioral. The changes come 1 to 2 weeks before your period. Once your period starts or soon after it starts, they'll go away. Most women have at least one sign of PMS each month. But it’s not the same for everyone. It can change as you get older. It can be hard to know if you just have a few symptoms before your period, or if it’s really PMS. One way to think about it is to ask the question: “Do these changes get in the way of my regular life? Do they cause trouble at work or with family and friends?” If you answer yes, it might be PMS. Another way to know is if you have symptoms in the 5 days before your period, for 3 months in a row. Women with PMS deal with it in lots of ways. You can make changes to improve your diet,sleep, andexercise. You can also learn ways to relax your mind and body. If what you try doesn’t seem to work, you could talk to your doctor. PMS shows up in many different ways. Everything in this list could be a sign of PMS. But most women get just a few of these, not all of them. Physical signs Emotional signs Behavioral signs Girls and women who still get their period can get PMS. But it’s most common in women who: Even though PMS is common, doctors don’t know exactly what causes it. It probably has to do with changes in your body chemistry around the time of your period. Some conditions affect PMS, but don’t cause it. PMS can be brought on, or can get worse if you: Women with other health problems may find that those problems get worse before their period. Some of those aremigraine headaches,asthma, andallergies. There are lots of ways to manage PMS. Even if you can’t totally fix it, it’s nice to know you have the power to help yourself. These ideas might help: Some women takevitaminsandmineralslikefolic acid,magnesium, vitamin B-6,vitamin E, andcalciumwithvitamin D. Others find that herbal remedies help. If you take any vitamins orsupplements, check with your doctor first to make sure they are safe for you. If you’ve tried different things but still have bad PMS, it’s probably time to get help. Make an appointment with your doctor orgynecologist. They’ll ask about your symptoms, your health, and medicines you take. They may take somebloodtests to make sure the problem is PMS and not something else. If you have notes about your symptoms, bring them to the appointment. Plan ahead about the questions you want to ask. That way, you’ll get the best help from your doctor. Your doctor may suggest a treatment plan including: Your doctor has several types of medicine to consider. NSAIDs.Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are painkillers that can also reduceinflammation(swelling). You can buy ones likeaspirin,ibuprofen, andnaproxenover the counter, or your doctor may prescribe a stronger dosage of these drugs. Diuretics.If you retain water when you have PMS, you may gain a littleweightand feel very bloated. Your doctor might prescribe adiuretic, which is medicine that helps you shed the extra water weight through natural means (by peeing more often). Be sure to tell your doctor if you’re taking any othermedications, especially NSAIDs. Taking NSAIDs and diuretics at the same time can damage yourkidneys. Antidepressants.There’s a connection between PMS anddepression: Roughly half of women who go to their doctor for PMS also have it, as well asanxiety. PMS often causes mood problems, includingdepressionduring the time of the month that PMS symptoms appear, even among women who don’t have it at other times. If your doctor thinks yourdepressionneeds treatment, they may prescribe anantidepressant. There are many antidepressants, and people respond differently to them, so it may take time to find one that’s right for you. You may have success with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), including: It can take 3 to 4 weeks before you see any benefits from an SSRI. Birth control pills (hormone-regulating pills).Many women with PMS have fewer unpleasant symptoms when they takebirth control pills. This is probably because, when you take them, you don’t ovulate (release an egg from your ovary each month). Doctors think that notovulatingis probably the reason for milder PMS symptoms. Taking the pill also is more likely to improve your cramps,headaches, or other body aches, and help with the way PMS affects your moods. SOURCES: Massachusetts General Hospital, MGH Center for Women’s Mental Health: “PMS & PMDD.” Office on Women’s Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: “Premenstrual syndrome.” Harvard Medical School, Patient Education Center: “Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS).” Mayo Clinic, Diseases and Conditions: “Premenstrual syndrome,”  “Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), Symptoms,” “Premenstrual syndrome (PMS): Treatments and drugs.” American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “FAQ, Premenstrual Syndrome,” “Premenstrual syndrome (PMS).” American Society for Reproductive Medicine: “Noncontraceptive benefits of birth control pills.” Causes and treatments. Symptoms of this severe form of PMS. When is it serious? Can they really ease symptoms? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.