Thalassemia is an inherited blood condition. If you have it, your body has fewer redblood cellsand less hemoglobin than it should. Hemoglobin is important because it lets your red blood cells carry oxygen to all parts of your body. Because of this, people with this condition may haveanemia, which makes you feeltired. You may hear it called things like Constant Spring, Cooley’s anemia, or hemoglobin Bart’s hydrops fetalis. These are common names for different forms of it. The two types are alpha thalassemia and beta thalassemia. The terms alpha and beta refer to the part of the hemoglobin the person is lacking. There are also terms for how serious the thalassemia is. A person with a trait or minor form may not have symptoms or only mild ones. They may not need treatment. Someone with a major form will need medical treatment. Thalassemia is genetic. It happens when you inherit mutated genes from your parents that change your hemoglobin. You have it from birth. You can’t catch thalassemia the way you catch acoldor the flu. If both of your parents carry thalassemia, you might get it. If you inherit two or more copies of abnormal genes from your parents, you may get mild to severe thalassemia, depending on what type of protein is affected. It’s more common in people from Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and Mediterranean countries like Greece or Turkey. Thalassemia is really a group of blood problems, not just one. To make hemoglobin, you need two proteins, alpha and beta. Without enough of one or the other, your red blood cells can’t carry oxygen the way they should. Alpha thalassemia means you don't make enough of the alpha hemoglobin protein chain to make your hemoglobin. With beta thalassemia, you don't make enough of the beta. You have four genes responsible for making the alpha protein chain of hemoglobin. You get two from each parent. If you have one abnormal copy of an alpha gene, you won’t have thalassemia but you’ll carry it. If you have two abnormal copies of an alpha gene, you’ll have mild alpha thalassemia. If you have more abnormal copies, you’ll have more serious alpha thalassemia. Babies with four abnormal copies of the alpha gene are often stillborn, or don’t survive long after birth. You have two genes that are needed to make the beta protein. You get one from each of your parents. If you have one abnormal copy of the beta gene, you’ll have mild beta thalassemia. If you have two copies, you’ll have more moderate to severe beta thalassemia. These can include: In some people, symptoms show up at birth. In others, it can take a couple of years to see anything. Some people who have thalassemia will show no signs at all. If you think you may have thalassemia, or if your parents have it, you should see a doctor. They will examine you and will ask questions. Children with moderate to severe thalassemia usually have signs by age 2. If a doctor suspects thalassemia, you’ll take blood tests. One is aCBC(complete blood count) test. The other is a hemoglobin electrophoresis test. If you arepregnantor trying to have ababy, you can have tests to learn if yourbabywill have the condition. If you do have thalassemia, you should see a blood expert known as a hematologist. You may also need other special doctors on your team, like those who treat theheartorliver. If you have thalassemia, follow these habits to stay well: With a mild case, you may feeltiredand not need treatment. But if it’s more serious, your organs may not get the oxygen they need. Treatment might include: Sometimes, blood transfusions cause reactions like a high fever,nausea,diarrhea,chills, andlow blood pressure. If you have any of these, see your doctor. Donated blood in the U.S. is very safe. But there’s a remote chance that you could get an infection from ablood transfusion. Work closely with your doctor, and keep up with your treatments. If a person’sanemiabecomes severe, it can cause permanent organ damage and even death. Some people with moderate to severe thalassemia have other health problems. These may include: These problems don’t happen to everyone who has thalassemia. You can’t prevent thalassemia, since it’s in your genes. If you have it and you want to have children, you might want to talk with a genetics counselor. This is an expert in health issues that are passed down through families. The counselor will explain your chance of having a child with thalassemia. If you and/or your partner carry thalassemia and your future children will be at risk, it’s possible to make sure they won’t have it within vitro fertilization(IVF). A doctor will test the embryos before choosing which to implant. Your outlook will depend on how severe your thalassemia is. Some people will have only mild symptoms. For others, it’s more severe. Severe thalassemia can lead toheart failureand an early death. But many people with thalassemia live as long as people without thalassemia. New treatments mean that people with thalassemia are now living longer with fewer symptoms. You may also want to look into joining a support group, so you can connect with other people who have the condition. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Thalassemia.” Cooley’s Anemia Foundation: “A Guide to Living with Thalassemia.” Thalassemia Support Foundation: “About Thalassemia.” Children’s Cancer and Blood Foundation: “Thalassemia: (Cooley’s Anemia).” National Institutes of Health. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “What Are the Signs and Symptoms of Thalassemias? Cooley’s Anemia Foundation: “Clinical Trials.” CDC: “Thalassemia,” “What is Thalassemia?” National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Thalassemia.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.