Ringwormisn’t a worm. It’s askininfection that’s caused bymoldlike fungi that live on the dead tissues of your skin,hair, and nails. You can get it in any of these places -- and on your scalp. When you get it between your toes, it’s what people call athlete’s foot. If it spreads to your groin, it’s known asjock itch.  The telltale sign is a red, scaly patch on light skin or brown or gray patches on skin of color. You may also get bumps that itch. Over time, the bump turns into a ring- or circle-shaped patch. It may turn into several rings. The inside of the patch is usually clear or scaly. The outside might be slightly raised and bumpy. Ringwormon your scalp tends to start out as a bump or small sore. It may turn flaky and scaly, and your scalp may feel tender and sore to the touch. You may notice that yourhairstarts to fall out in patches. Ringwormis highly contagious. You can catch it in any of the following ways: You’ll have to see your doctor to be sure if the infection is ringworm. There are a number of other skin conditions that look like it. Your doctor will probably scrape some skin from the itchy, scaly areas and look at them under a microscope. How the infection is treated depends on where it is and how bad it is. In many cases, your doctor may recommend an over-the-counter (OTC) medicine you can get at the drugstore. If the ringworm is on your skin, an OTCantifungalcream, lotion, or powder may work just fine. Some of the most popular ones areclotrimazole(Lotrimin,Mycelex) andmiconazole. In most cases, you’ll have to use the medicines on your skin for 2 to 4 weeks to make sure you kill thefungusthat causes ringworm. It also will lower its chance of coming back. If you have ringworm on your scalp or in many different places on your body, OTC treatments probably won’t be enough. Your doctor will have to write you a prescription. Keep aneyeout for symptoms that get worse or don’t clear up after 2 weeks. If they don’t, call your doctor. The fungi that cause it are everywhere. Still, here are some things you can do to lower your chances of getting ringworm or stop it from spreading: SOURCES KidsHealth.org: “Ringworm.” Mayo Clinic: “Ringworm (body).” CDC: “Treatment for Ringworm,” “Ringworm Risk & Prevention.” NHS UK: “Ringworm and Other Fungal Infections – Treatment.” Summit Medical Group: “Ringworm.” American Academy of Dermatology Association: "Ringworm: Signs and Symptoms." Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.