West syndrome is a type ofepilepsythat affects babies. It’s named after the doctor who discovered it. Experts have many names for it, including: West syndrome causes seizures. They last only a few seconds, but they happen in bunches called clusters. There can be as many as 150seizuresin a cluster, and some babies can have up to 60 clusters a day. Sometimes, they don’t happen in clusters at first. Children with West syndrome may have other symptoms such as: This condition is rare. It affects fewer than 6 babies out 10,000. Most infants get it before they’re a year old, usually between months 4 and 8. A little over half of babies who have West syndrome are boys. Things that can cause West syndrome include: Your doctor may talk about three kinds of West syndrome, depending on the cause: If your child’s doctor suspects West syndrome, they’ll ask for detailed information about your child’s seizures. Try to take a video before the appointment so you can show them what theseizureslook like. This can help your doctor figure out if it’s West syndrome, which is often mistaken for colic. If your child is having seizures, they’ll need anelectroencephalogram(EEG) to record the patterns of electrical activity in their brain. These patterns can show the difference between West syndrome and other seizure disorders. Your child may have these tests: Treatments can help control the seizures. These may include: Medication The most common treatment for West syndrome is medication. Your doctor may want to try: About two-thirds of babies who take ACTH or vigabatrin have fewer or less intense seizures. It may be a day or two before these treatments work. Medications like ACTH, vigabatrin, and steroids can have side effects, so you and your doctor will have to balance the good and the bad for your child. The side effects of these drugs include: Vigabatrin side effects include: If these medications don’t work, your doctor might want to try: Ketogenic diet Your baby’s doctor may suggest aketogenic diet-- one that’s high in fats and low in carbohydrates. It isn’t something you should try to do by yourself. The doctor will want you to work with a nutrition specialist. You’ll still be able tobreastfeed, but you’ll also have to use a ketogenic formula. The doctor may want to admit your baby to the hospital to start the process. The ketogenic diet can have side effects, likekidney stones,dehydration, and constipation. You and the doctor will have to watch your little one closely. Surgery If brain scans show lesions on your baby’s brain, they might need surgery. Your doctor might suggest acorpus callosotomy, which is sometimes called split-brain surgery. The corpus callosum is a band of nerve fibers deep inside the brain that connects the two halves. During this procedure, the surgeon will cut it so that seizure signals on one side of the brain can no longer travel to other side. Your baby may still have seizures, but they won’t be as intense. This surgery can also treat a common cause of West syndrome,tuberous sclerosis complex. In this condition, cancerous tumors grow in your baby’s body, including the brain. Some people with this condition do better with a type of surgery called resection, in which the doctor removes parts of the brain that are causing seizures. If your child hasdevelopmental delays, other types of therapies and assistance may help. These may include occupational therapy and postural aids. Usually, the spasms stop by the time a child is 4 years old. But most people who have West syndrome will have other kinds ofepilepsyor seizure conditions when they’re older. West syndrome can affect your child’s development and ability to think. How severe their problems are depends on what caused the condition and how they were developing before they got it: Babies with West syndrome usually have mental disabilities or trouble learning later in life, but up to 1 in 5 will have typical mental skills or only mild mental disabilities. About 7 in 10 babies with West syndrome have severe mental disabilities. They might getautism, especially if the syndrome came from tuberous sclerosis complex, a condition that causes noncancerous tumors in the body and brain. Or they could be hyperactive, which means it’ll be hard for them to sit still or concentrate. It’s rare, but some children who had West syndrome as babies will die before adulthood. It usually happens before the age of 10. Your baby is more likely to develop normally if: The future depends on what caused your baby’s West syndrome. If it's from an injury, infection, or a condition like tuberous sclerosis complex, they may not fare as well. If there wasn’t another cause and their development was on track before it, their chances of a normal life are a little bit better than 50-50. The odds are even higher if they get treatment within a month of getting West syndrome. About 1 in 4 babies who have it will develop normally and be able to have a job when they grow up. Parents of children with West syndrome can find -- or give -- help via the Infantile Spasms Project, an online forum run by the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles. SOURCES: National Organization for Rare Disorders: “West syndrome.” Medscape: “Infantile Spasm (West Syndrome).” National Institutes of Health, Genetic and Rare Disease Information Center: “West syndrome.” Epilepsy Foundation: “Infantile Spasms,” “Infantile Spasms (West’s Syndrome) and Tuberous Sclerosis Complex,” “West Syndrome (Infantile Spasms),” “Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome (LGS).” Epilepsia: “The underlying etiology of infantile spasms (West syndrome): Information from the United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study (UKISS) on contemporary causes and their classification.” Medical Home Portal: “Infantile Spasms.” Institute for Child Development: “West Syndrome.” Epilepsy Action: “West syndrome (infantile spasms).” Cedars Sinai: “West Syndrome.” Translational Pediatrics: “Management of infantile spasms.” National Institutes of Health Genetics Home Reference: “tuberous sclerosis complex.” Infantile Spasms Project: “Support.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.