Ventricular tachycardiais an unusually fast heartbeat that starts in the lower part of yourheart, the ventricles. It’s sometimes called VT or V-tach. What is a normal heartbeat? Your heart is a muscular pump with four chambers. The two upper ones are called the atria. The two lower ones are called the ventricles. They work together to pumpbloodthroughout your body. Every day, a healthy heart beats about 100,000 times. Your heartbeat is controlled by electrical signals. These signals follow a pattern. They start in the sinoatrial (SA) node. It’s in one of your atria and is often called your heart’s natural pacemaker. The signal causes your atria to contract so blood moves into your ventricles. It then moves down to another part of your heart called the atrioventricular (AV) node. This tells your ventricles to contract and move the blood along. What happens in ventricular tachycardia? When you have VT, the electrical signals in your ventricles take over and make your heart beat quickly. The pulses coming from your SA node are also affected. Most regular heart rates are in the range of 60 to 100 beats a minute. Ventricular tachycardia can result in rates of 170 beats a minute or even more. When this happens, your heart’s upper chambers don’t have time to refill and send that blood to the ventricles. So your blood doesn’t get pumped throughout your body the way it should. In some instances, this condition can lead to ventricular fibrillation, a condition that causes very rapid and uneven heartbeats of 300 or more a minute. It is a life-threatening emergency. You may not notice any symptoms, especially if your heart beats fast for only a few seconds. VT can cause: When should I call a doctor? See your doctor as soon as possible if you’ve felt lightheaded or dizzy, had rapid heartbeats, or have fainted. Call 911 if you have chest pain andtrouble breathingalong with a very fast pulse. You’re more likely to have ventricular tachycardia if you’re older or if someone in your family has a heart rhythm problem. Other conditions that can cause VT or raise your chances of it include: When doctors can’t find a cause, it’s called idiopathic ventriculartachycardia. Your doctor will review your medical history and symptoms. You’ll also have some tests of your heart. The first one you’ll probably get is called anEKG. It records your heart’s electrical activity. Your doctor may also want you to get electrophysiology testing, which pinpoints problem areas in your heart. You may not need to do anything if you don’t have symptoms or if episodes last less than 30 seconds. Otherwise, your treatment will depend on what’s causing the problem. If amedicationorcaffeineis causing the VT, you might need to stop taking it. Other treatments include:  The best way to prevent VT is to keep your heart healthy.  SOURCES: American Heart Association, “About Arrhythmia.” Cleveland Clinic, “Ventricular Tachycardia,” “Ventricular Tachycardia Overview and Treatment Guide.” Mayo Clinic, Diseases and Conditions, “Ventricular Tachycardia,” “Ventricular Fibrillation.” Tung, R.,Circulation,July 2010. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Cedars Sinai: “Ventricular Tachycardia.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Ventricular Tachycardia.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Ventricular Tachycardia.” Medscape: “Ventricular Tachycardia.” Mayo Clinic: “Pacemaker.” Warning signs and complications. Non-drug ways you can manage your condition. Ablation, cardioversion, pacemaker, and more. See how much you know about abnormal heart rhythm. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.