Yourbloodgoes from yourheartto yourlungsthrough yourpulmonary artery. In the lungs, the blood is supplied with oxygen, and then it goes back to the heart, which pumps the oxygen-rich blood to the rest of your body. When ablood clotgets caught in one of the arteries that go from theheartto the lungs, it’s called a pulmonary embolism (PE). The clot blocks the normal flow of blood. This blockage can cause serious problems, like damage to your lungs and low oxygen levels in your blood. The lack of oxygen can harm other organs in your body, too. If the clot is big or the artery is clogged by many smaller clots, a pulmonary embolism can be deadly. Pulmonary embolisms usually travel to the lungs from a deep vein in the legs. Doctors call thisdeep vein thrombosis(DVT). These clots develop when the blood can’t flow freely through the legs because your body is still for a long time, say during a long flight or drive. It might also happen if you’re onbed restafter surgery or illness. The risk factors are the same as those forDVT. Doctors refer to these as Virchow’s triad. They are: In rare cases, anarteryin the lung can be blocked by something other than a clot, like an air bubble or part of a tumor. If you break a bigbone, fat from the bone marrow can sometimes come through the blood and cause blockage. The best way to prevent a PE is to try to stopblood clotsfrom forming deep in your veins. This can be challenging if you’ve been on bed rest after a surgery or illness, or if you just took a long flight. If you’re at risk, here are a few things that may help lower your chances of getting these dangerous blood clots: Blood thinners Doctors call theseanticoagulants. They keep your blood from forming clots. Your doctor may prescribe them to you while you’re in the hospital for surgery. They might also suggest that you keep taking them for some time after you go home. Your doctor might also recommendblood thinnersif you’ve been hospitalized after astrokeorheart attack, or if you have complications from cancer. Compression stockings These are long socks that squeeze your legs. The extra pressure helps blood move through your veins and leg muscles. Your doctor may recommend that you wear them for a while after surgery. Exercise Get out of bed and walk when you’re getting over a long stay in the hospital or an illness that’s kept you in bed for too long. It’ll keep the blood in your legs flowing so it doesn’t have a chance to pool. Stretchingduring trips If you’re on a long flight, try to walk around every few hours. If you can’t stand up, flex youranklesby pulling your toes toward you. Here’s another stretch you can try to do while seated: If you’re driving a long distance, stop every hour and stretch your legs. Also, be sure to drink extra fluids to help you stay hydrated. Lifestyle changes Other steps you can take include: In life-threatening cases of pulmonary embolism, your doctor may decide to give you drugs called thrombolytics to break up the clot. It may even need to be taken out or broken up with surgery, though this is rare. SOURCES: American Heart Association: “How the Healthy Heart Works.” Mayo Clinic: “Pulmonary Embolism,” “Pulmonary Embolism: Self-management.” National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “What is Pulmonary Embolism?” CDC: “Venous Thromboembolism (Blood Clots).” Society for Vascular Surgery: “Pulmonary Embolism.” Gov.UK: “Preventing Pulmonary Embolism.” Cleveland Clinic: “Blood Clots and Travel: What You Need to Know.” Signs of pulmonary embolism which can be serious. Learn how inflammation from infection can lead to a clot. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.