Thyroid nodules are solid or fluid-filled lumps or bumps. They’re found on yourthyroid, a small, powerful gland in your neck. This gland makesthyroidhormone, which affects yourmetabolism(the internal process that turns your food into energy),heart rate, and many other systems in the body. Sometimes, cells in your thyroid can grow out of control and form a lump. Most often the answer is no.You usually can’t feel thyroid nodules. Even though they happen from an overgrowth of cells, most thyroid nodules aren’t cancer. About 1 in 10 thyroid nodules turn out to be cancer. Benign (noncancerous) thyroid nodules are common. Lots of people get them as they get older. If a thyroid nodule isn’t cancerous,  it may not need any treatment.Doctors might just watch to make sure it doesn’t keep growing or begin to cause other problems. There are different types of thyroid nodules that aren’t cancerous: Toxic nodulesmake too much thyroid hormone. This can lead to hyperthyroidism, which makes the metabolism speed up. Multinodular goitershave several nodules. They may also make too much thyroid hormone and may press on other structures. Thyroid cystsare full of fluid, sometimes with other debris. They may happen after an injury. Thyroid nodules usually don’t have symptoms. If they are large, they may cause: Trouble breathing Trouble swallowing A throat “tickle” Hoarseness or voice change When a nodule causes the thyroid to make too much hormone this is sometimes called a “hot nodule.” It may cause: Weight loss Muscle weakness Heat intolerance Anxiousness Irritability Irregular heartbeat Weak bones Sometimes people with thyroid nodules make too little thyroid hormone. This can cause symptoms of hypothyroidism: Fatigue Cold sensitivity Constipation Dry skin Weight gain Puffy face Hoarseness Muscle weakness High cholesterol Muscle aches or stiffness Joint pain, swelling, or stiffness Thinning hair Depression Memory loss It’s not always clear why a person gets thyroid nodules. Several medical conditions can cause them to form. They include: Thyroiditis:This is chronicinflammationof the thyroid. One type of thyroiditis is calledHashimoto’s disease. It’s associated withlow thyroidactivity (hypothyroidism). Iodine deficiency:Adietthat lacks iodine can result in thyroid nodules. This is uncommon in the U.S., since iodine is added to many foods. Thyroid adenoma:This is an unexplained overgrowth of thyroid tissue. Most adenomas are harmless, but some produce thyroid hormone. This leads to anoveractive thyroid(hyperthyroidism). Thyroid cancer:Most thyroid nodules aren’tcancer, but some can be. Thyroid nodules are actually quite common. By the age of 60, half of all people have them. They’re often very small. You might only learn you have a thyroid nodule when your doctor feels for one during an examination or if you have anultrasoundof your thyroid. Still, several things can increase your chances of developing a thyroid nodule. They include: Living in a part of the world where the diet doesn’t include iodine Having a family history of thyroid nodules Being female Being older Having a history of radiation exposure to head or neck You may be able to identify one just by looking in the mirror. Face the mirror with your chin raised a little. Swallow and look for a bump on either side of your windpipe near your Adam’s apple. Put your fingers gently on your neck in that spot and feel for a bump. If you find one, ask your doctor about it. About 90% of thyroid nodules are benign (noncancerous). If you notice one, have your doctor check it. For problems with your thyroid, you may want to see a specialist called an endocrinologist. Endocrinologists specialize in health problems related to the glands that make hormones, including the thyroid. They will do aphysical examand might order one of the following tests to find out if it’scanceror not: Bloodtest for thyroid hormones Ultrasound Fine-needlebiopsy Thyroid scan With a biopsy, your doctor will insert a very fine needle into your thyroid nodule to collect a few cells. They’ll send them to a lab for further study. Noncancerous thyroid nodules can still be a problem if they grow too large and make it hard for you tobreatheor swallow. When a nodule is not cancerous, treatment may include: “Watchful waiting” Thyroid hormone therapy When nodules cause hyperthyroidism, treatment may include: Radioactive iodine Antithyroid medicines Beta blockers Surgery Any cancerous thyroid nodules should be removed surgically. The same is true for very large ones and those that change and develop strange features over time. SOURCES: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ Office on Women’s Health: “Thyroid Disease.” American Thyroid Association: “Thyroid Nodules.” Mayo Clinic: “Thyroid Nodules: Overview,” “Thyroid Nodules: Causes,” “Thyroid Nodules: Diagnosis,”“Hyperthyroidism,” “Hypothyroidism.” American Cancer Society: “What is Thyroid Cancer?” Cleveland Clinic: “Thyroid Nodule.” Hormone Health Network: “The Value of an Endocrinologist.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.