Necrotizing enterocolitis, or NEC, is a serious disease that affects theintestinesof (primarily)  premature infants. It typically happens within the first 2 weeks of life in babies who are fedformulainstead ofbreastmilk.In this condition, bacteria invade the wall of the intestine.Inflammationsets in. This can create a crack or gap that allows nasty germs to leak into theabdomen. If not treated, it can lead to serious infection and death. Doctors aren’t sure. They do know that premature infants havelungsandintestinesthat are weak and less mature than those of full-term babies. That means their bodies don’t movebloodand oxygen around like they should. They also have problems breaking down their food and fighting infection. Fortunately, NEC is not common. It affects just one in 2,000 to 4,000 births. It can happen in anynewborn, but it’s most common in premature babies who weigh less than 3.25 lbs. Others who may be at risk include: They can differ from child to child. But aninfantwho has NEC will normally develop the following in the first two weeks of life: Other digestive conditions or medical problems produce similar symptoms to NEC. If your child develops any of those listed above, call your doctor. Your child’s doctor will take an X-ray of their abdomen and do some blood tests, usually in the neonatal intensive care unit. If it’s NEC, the X-ray will showgasor air bubbles in the wall of their intestine. Blood tests for infants with NEC show low white blood counts. That means your baby’s ability to fight infection is weakened. This will depend on a number of things, including how premature your baby is, their overall health and medical history, and how far the infection has spread. Then, your doctor may do any of these things: Once the infection is gone (typically in 5 to 7 days), your baby can start feeding again bymouth. If they don’t get better with treatment or they have a hole in their intestine, they’ll need surgery. This involves removing dead tissue and the parts of the intestine that have ruptured or are about to rupture. In the most serious cases, children who have surgery may need to have their intestine or bowel connected to an opening in the abdomen. Doctors call this an “ostomy.” Most infants with this condition fully recover. In some cases, the bowel is scarred or it narrows. This may lead to a future blockage. Babies who’ve had a large piece of their intestine removed in surgery may not be able to absorb nutrients normally. In the most severe cases, they may need a bowel transplant in order to live. Right now, there’s no way to prevent NEC. But studies show that babies who were only fed breast milk (no formula), were less likely to develop this disease. That’s why doctors recommend feeding at-risk infantsbreastmilk, starting with small amounts. Many NICU's are now using donor breast milk when there is none available from the mother in order to reduce the incidence of NEC Researchers are working on promising new treatments for NEC. Among them:probiotics, which are live bacteria and yeasts that are good for you, to counteract the bacteria that cause the infection, and blocking nitric oxide. That’s agaswhich is produced as a result of NEC. It helps to destroy the wall of the intestine. SOURCES: Children’s Hospital Los Angeles: “Necrotizing Enterocolitis.” U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Necrotizing Enterocolitis Risk,” “Probiotics: Role in Pathophysiology and Prevention in Necrotizing Enterocolitis,” “Roles of Nitric Oxide and Intestinal Microbiota in the Pathogenesis of Necrotizing Enterocolitis.” Children’s Hospital Philadelphia: “Necrotizing Enterocolitis.” Merck Manual: “Necrotizing Enterocolitis.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.