A Wilms tumor (also called a nephroblastoma) is the most commonkidney cancerin children. Most children with it have a tumor on onekidney, but about 5% get a tumor on both. The reasons aren’t clear, but it most often affects kids who are 3 to 4 years old. It’s much less common after age 5. Doctors are getting better at spotting and treating this type ofcancer, so many children who have it will make a full recovery. Some children who have a Wilms tumor won’t notice symptoms. Others may have: Many Wilms tumors get very big before anyone notices them. They’re sometimes the only sign of the disease. The average size is 1 pound. Allcancers happen when cells in your body start to grow out of control. If your child has a Wilms tumor, theirkidneycells didn’t grow like they should have. Instead, they turned intocancercells. Most of the time, this is because of a random change in a gene. Rarely, it’s because of gene changes handed down from a parent. Things that might make a child more likely to have a Wilms tumor include: There are two kinds of Wilms tumors, divided by how the cells look under a microscope. Your child’s medical appointment will probably include: If the doctor finds a tumor in your child’s kidney, they may: Your doctor will use test results to figure out how far a tumor has spread. This is called staging. The stages of a Wilms tumor are: How a Wilms tumor is treated depends on how much the cancer has spread. It can include surgery,chemotherapy, andradiation therapy. Surgery If your doctor operates, they may do one of these procedures: Chemotherapy Certain medications can fight or kill cancer cells inside your child’s body. Most children who have Wilms tumors will get chemo at some point during treatment. These drugs can also affect healthy cells, leading to side effects including: Your medical team will often be able to manage side effects. Radiation Strong radiation can also kill cancer cells. A machine focuses it onto the cancer. Doctors tend to use radiation for tumors that are stage III and above. But it can also have short-term and long-term side effects, including tissue damage, so they’ll use as little as possible. The outlook for most kids with a Wilms tumor is good. Up to 90% of children who have a tumor with favorable histology can be cured. If the tumor has unfavorable histology, the cure rate is lower. Once cancer treatment ends, your child will have regular doctor visits to make sure they stay healthy. If there’s something you don’t understand, make sure to ask your doctor. This will help you know how to best to support your child. Mayo Clinic: “Wilms’ Tumor.” American Cancer Society: “What is Cancer?” “What is Wilms’ Tumor?” Kids Health from Nemours: “Wilms Tumor.” Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center: “About Wilm’s Tumor.” CureSearch for Children’s Cancer: “Wilms Tumor in Children – In Treatment.” St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital: “Wilms Tumor.” The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center: “Wilms’ Tumor Symptoms.” Cancer.net/American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Childhood Cancer: Questions to Ask the Doctor.” Cancer Research UK: “Wilms’ tumour (kidney cancer in children.)” American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Wilms Tumor – Childhood.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.