Frozen shoulderis a condition that affects yourshoulderjoint. It usually involves pain and stiffness that develops gradually, gets worse and then finally goes away. This can take anywhere from a year to 3 years. Your shoulder is made up of three bones that form a ball-and-socket joint. They are your upper arm (humerus), shoulder blade (scapula), and collarbone (clavicle). There’s also tissue surrounding your shoulder joint that holds everything together. This is called the shoulder capsule. With frozen shoulder, the capsule becomes so thick and tight that it’s hard to move. Bands of scar tissue form and there’s less of a liquid called synovial fluid to keep the joint lubricated. These things limit motion even more. The main symptoms of a frozen shoulder are pain and stiffness that make it difficult or impossible to move it. If you have frozen shoulder, you’ll likely feel a dull or achy pain in one shoulder. You might also feel the pain in the shoulder muscles that wrap around the top of your arm. You might feel the same sensation in your upper arm. Your pain could get worse at night, which can make it hard tosleep. You’ll typically go through three phases with a frozen shoulder. Each has its own unique symptoms and timeline. Freezing stage: Frozen stage: Thawing stage: It’s not clear why some people develop it, but some groups are more at risk. Frozen shoulder happens more often in women than men, and you’re more likely to get it if you’re between the ages of 40 and 60. Your risk might also go up if you’re in the process of recovering from a medical condition like astroke, or surgery like amastectomythat keeps you from moving your arm. Certain medical conditions can increase your risk too. You may also be more likely to get frozen shoulder if you havediabetes. About 10% to 20% of people with diabetes get frozen shoulder. Other medical problems likeheart disease,thyroiddisease, or Parkinson’s disease are linked to frozen shoulder, too. To diagnose frozen shoulder, your doctor will give you aphysical exam. They'll check it to see how badly it hurts and how far it moves. During the “active” part of the exam, they’ll let you move your shoulder on your own. During the “passive” portion, they’ll move it for you, and note the differences. Your doctor may decide you need an injection ofanestheticin your shoulder. This is amedicationthat will numb the pain so that they can better judge your active and passive ranges of motion. A physical exam is usually enough to diagnose frozen shoulder, but your doctor may also order imaging tests such as X-rays,ultrasound, orMRIto rule out other problems likearthritisor a tornrotator cuffthat can alsocause painand limit how far it moves. Over-the-counter nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) likeaspirinoribuprofencan help relieve the pain andinflammationin your shoulder. If they don’t help, your doctor might prescribe a stronger medication. Your treatment might also include going to a physical therapist for strengthening andstretching exercisesto improve your range of motion. If your symptoms are intense or don’t improve over time, your doctor might recommend other kinds of treatments, including: SOURCES: OrthoInfo: “Frozen Shoulder” Mayo Clinic: “Frozen Shoulder” Medscape: “Adhesive Capsulitis (Frozen Shoulder)” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.