Epididymitis is when the epididymis -- a long, coiled tube at the back of each of a man’s two testicles -- is inflamed. It’s usually caused by a sexually transmitted infection, but several other types of bacteria can cause epididymitis as well. What does the epididymis do? The epididymis carriesspermfrom the testes, which produce it, to the vas deferens, a tube behind thebladder. The epididymis lies in coils around the back of a man’s testicle and can be nearly 20 feet long. It can take nearly 2 weeks for sperm to make it from one end of the epididymis to the other. In that time, the sperm cells mature to the point where they’re able to fertilize a woman’s egg cell. When abacterial infectionstrikes, the epididymis gradually becomes swollen and painful. This usually happens on one testicle, rather than both. It can last up to 6 weeks if untreated. You might have one or more of these other possible symptoms: See your doctor if you have any of these symptoms. Related conditions Epididymitis shares many of the symptoms of a more serious problem calledtesticular torsion(that’s when a testicle gets turned around the cord that connects it to the body). Testicular torsion symptoms usually develop much faster, however. Torsion is an emergency that may cause you to lose a testicle if you don’t get treatment quickly. When the swelling and tenderness extends past the epididymis and into the testicle itself, that’s known as epididymo-orchitis. The most common causes of epididymitis are a pair of sexually transmitted infections:gonorrheaandchlamydia. About 600,000 cases of epididymitis are reported in the United States every year, mostly in men between 18 and 35. In men older than 35, epididymitis usually happens because of an infection of the bladder or urinary tract. Some cases of epididymitis are caused by the E. coli bacteria, or in rare cases, by the same bacteria that causestuberculosis. Tell your partners If your condition is the result of asexually transmitted disease, you should tell anyone with whom you have had sex in the past 60 days about your diagnosis. If it’s been more than 60 days since you had sex, contact your most recent sex partner. They should see a doctor and get tested forsexually transmitted diseasesas well. Your chances of having epididymitis rise if you have: Kids can also get epididymitis. An STI,urinary tract infection, or a physical problem in the urinary and reproductive organs can cause the condition. Symptoms in children are similar to those in adults: When you go to the doctor, they will examine your scrotum for signs of infection and ask you questions about your symptoms. They might also do a rectal exam to check yourprostateand check for any tenderness. If your doctor suspects epididymitis based on the exam, you might get one or more tests. They include: The most common treatment for epididymitis isantibiotics. If your doctor believes you have epididymitis, they might give you a prescription for antibiotics before any lab test results are even back. You’ll likely take thosemedicationsfor a week or two, and you’ll usually start feeling better in a matter of days. Always take your full course of antibiotics as prescribed, even when you feel better. Even after your antibiotics take effect, some swelling may last for weeks or months, and you may still be sore during that time. You can reduce thepainand swelling by taking over-the-counter pain relievers, applying a cold compress, or elevating your scrotum (you might wear supportive underwear, like a jockstrap). If left untreated, epididymitis can become a “chronic” condition, one that lingers and causes recurring problems. Epididymitis might also cause an infection in the scrotum. In rare cases, it can damage a man’s ability to make a womanpregnant. SOURCES: CDC: “Epididymitis.” American Urology Association: “Pathology for urologists -- Epididymitis.” Cornwall, G., and von Horsten, H.The Genetics of Male Infertility: Sperm Maturation in the Epididymis.Humana Press, 2007. American Family Physician: “Epididymitis and Orchitis: An Overview.” Urology Care Foundation: “Epididymitis and Orchitis.” The Mayo Clinic: “Epididymitis,” “Epididymitis: Diagnosis and Tests.” National Health Services (UK): “Epididymitis.” Mayo Clinic: “Epididymis.” University of Rochester Medical Center: “Epididymitis in Children.” 11 things every man should stop believing. What it means for your overall health. Your guide to sculpted shoulders, better biceps, and more. What you need to know. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.