The body is a complex machine. Many organs and systems constantly work to keep it healthy. Some functions are so crucial that you can't live if they stop. When they fail, special medical procedures, commonly calledlife support, can keep you alive until your body is ready to take over again. But sometimes the body isn't able to resume the work. If these systems stop working for any reason, you need life support:  When most people talk about a person being on life support, they're usually talking about a ventilator, which is a machine that helps someone breathe. A ventilator keeps oxygen flowing throughout the body by pushing air into thelungs. It's used temporarily for conditions like pneumonia, but it may be needed longer for someone with lung failure. One end of a tube goes into the windpipe through the nose or mouth. The other end attaches to the electric pump. Some people get medicine to make them more comfortable and sleepy while on a breathing machine. When a person'sheartstops, doctors will try to restart it. These life support methods include CPR, which keepsbloodand oxygen flowing throughout the body, electric shocks (called defibrillation) to get the heart beating again, andmedicationto help the heart work. Less urgent forms of life support includedialysisto filter toxins from theblood, and a feeding tube or an IV to give nutrition and water. Doctors, nurses, and other health care professionals will begin life support immediately unless:  Doctors usually advise stopping life support when there is no hope left for recovery. The organs are no longer able to function on their own. Keeping the treatment going at that point may draw out the process of dying and may also be costly. Choosing to remove life support usually means that the person will die within hours or days. The timing depends on what treatment is stopped. People tend to stop breathing and die soon after a ventilator shuts off, though some do start breathing again on their own. If they are not taking in any fluids, they will usually die within several days of a feeding tube removal, though they may survive for as long as a week or two. When someone is unconscious or not of sound mind, doctors and family members decide when life support measures should stop. It's a hard decision, especially if the sick person hasn't previously discussed their end-of-life wishes with their family. Doctors encourage family members to focus on what they think their loved one would want. It's important to remember that it's the underlying condition, not the removal of life support, that actually causes someone to die, and doctors will do all they can to keep your loved one comfortable. SOURCES: Canadian Virtual Hospice: "Nutrition." Cleveland Clinic Health Library: "Understanding Life Support Measures." Fairview Health Services: "Removing Life Support." National Institutes of Health: "How Does a Ventilator Work?" Pamela D. Portnoy-Saitta, DO, attending physician, emergency medicine, Island Emergency Medical Physicians. Siegel, M.Clinics in Chest Medicine, 2009. Society of Critical Care Medicine: "Life Support Choices." Here's how to avoid it. Non-drug options that can help. What to expect when your loved one is dying. Understanding the difference. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.