It can happen to anybody -- you eat something and it doesn’t agree with you. You feel sick to yourstomach, and you might come down withdiarrhea. After a couple of days (or less in most cases), the trouble goes away and that’s the end of it. A possible source of the illness:listeria, one of thecauses of food poisoning. It’s triggered bylisteriabacteria that can live in soil,water, dust, animalpoop, and other substances. You can get sick if you eat food that carries it. For most healthy people, the infection doesn’t pose much of a threat, even if it makes you sick for a day or two. Healthy people rarely become ill from listeria infection, but for some people, the infection can be serious or even life-threatening, particularlypregnantwomen and their babies, people whose immune systems aren’t working right, and seniors. If you belong to any of those groups, you need to be extra cautious. Prompt antibiotic treatment can help curb the effects of listeria infection. Listeria is caused by bacteria that can grow atcoldtemperatures, like those inside a refrigerator. Even freezing doesn’t stop it. When it contaminates food, you can’t see, smell, or taste it. People pick up the infection most often from deli meats that aren’t processed properly or from dairy products made from milk that isn’t pasteurized -- in other words, the milk hasn’t been heated to kill germs. Other common sources of outbreaks are: When you get a listeria infection, the signs typically include: They could appear a few days after you eat the bad food, or they might take a couple of months to show up. If you have any of those symptoms, contact your doctor. If the infection spreads to your nervous system, it’s more serious. This severe form, called listeriosis, is fatal for 20% of people who have it. This happens most often with the very young, the very old, and people with weakened immune systems. The signs could be: Go for emergency care or call 911 if you or a loved one have any of these symptoms. When you’re pregnant, you need to take special care because you have an increased risk of listeria in theblood. Call your doctor if you have: A mild case of listeria may need no treatment at all. For a more serious case, the doctor may useantibiotics. There’s novaccineto protect against listeria. So it’s important to be on guard. The main foods that can make you sick include: Be sure towash your hands. Clean them well with warm, soapywaterbefore you start cooking. If you handle raw meat or poultry, wash them afterward. Here are some other good ideas for cleaning, handling, and cooking food: Pregnant women, and especially pregnant Hispanic women, are more likely than most people to come down with listeriosis. An infection, even one that affects the mother mildly, can have very serious effects on thebaby, including premature birth or even stillbirth. If ababyis born with listeria, symptoms might include: Pregnant women and people in the other at-risk groups -- seniors and people whose immune systems are weak -- need to be especially careful. They should not eat: Just as cars might be recalled by their makers because of safety defects, companies that make and sell food sometimes have to recall it. News media report these recalls when they happen, and the federal foodsafety.gov website lists recalls on its home page. If you see a recall for food that you’ve eaten, watch for symptoms of listeria, and contact your doctor if you have any. SOURCES: CDC: “Listeria (Listeriosis).” UpToDate: “Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of Listeria monocytogenes infection.” Foodsafety.gov: “Recall & Alerts.” KidsHealth: “About Listeria.” Mayo Clinic: “Listeria infection.” Ohioline (Ohio State University Extension): “Listeria monocytogenes: A concern for pregnant women and older adults.” What do you know about listeria? Simple tips to avoid illness. When to call the doctor. Should you be concerned? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.