Catatonia is a group of symptoms that usually involve a lack of movement and communication, and also can include agitation, confusion, and restlessness. Until recently, it was thought of as a type ofschizophrenia. But doctors now understand that other mental illnesses and some conditions that throw off your body’smetabolismalso can make you catatonic. About 1 person in 10 who has a severemental illnesswill have catatonia at some point. Catatonia can be treated, but if it’s not, it can lead to life-threatening problems. Doctors can diagnose someone as catatonic if they have any three of these signs: There are three types of catatonia: Doctors aren’t sure exactly what makes someone become catatonic. It happens most often with people who havemood disordersorpsychotic disorders, likedepression,bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia. About a third of people who are catatonic also havebipolar disorder. Several physical conditions can lead to catatonia in people who don’t have a mental illness. These include: Doctors usually treat catatonia with a kind of sedative called abenzodiazepinethat’s often used to easeanxiety. Another treatment option is electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). It sends electrical impulses to the person’s brain through electrodes placed on their head. (They’re given medicine tosleepthrough the procedure.) It might be recommended if: SOURCES: Catatonia Information Center, Penn State University. Psychosomatic Medicine: “Catatonic Stupor in Schizophrenic Disorders and Subsequent Medical Complications and Mortality.” Psychiatry: “Clinical Manifestations, Diagnosis, and Empirical Treatments for Catatonia.” The Journal of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience: “Catatonia in Psychotic Patients: Clinical Features and Treatment Response.” World Journal of Psychiatry: “Catatonia: Our current understanding of its diagnosis, treatment and pathophysiology.” Wolters-Kluwer / Up To Date: “Catatonia: Treatment and prognosis.” Primary Care Companion to theJournal of Clinical Psychiatry: “Dread Complications of Catatonia: A Case Discussion and Review of the Literature.” Schizophrenia Research: “Catatonia in DSM-V.” Behavioral Sciences: “The Syndrome of Catatonia.” Journal of Psychopathology: “Catatonia from the first descriptions to DSM-5.” Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology: “Recurrent Catatonia in Parkinson’s Disease.” BMJJournal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry:“Malignant catatonia secondary to sporadic encephalitis lethargica.” National Institute on Drug Abuse: “Benzodiazepines and Opioids.” American Psychiatric Association: “What is electroconvulsive therapy?” Famous faces you may recognize. Be aware of these warning signs. The real truth on this condition. Symptoms of schizoaffective disorder. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.