 Vulvar canceris when cancerous cells grow out of control on or in the vulva, the outer part of a woman’s genitals. It’s different from vaginalcancer, which starts inside thevagina. A woman’s vulva includes:  You might not notice any symptoms early on. Over time, you might have: These can also be signs of other conditions, so talk to your doctor if you spot problems. There are several main forms of this disease. Squamous cell carcinoma.This is the most common type. It starts in your skin cells. It might be linked to the human papillomavirus (HPV), especially in younger women. A subtype called verrucouscarcinomagrows slowly and can look like awart. Adenocarcinoma.This type usually starts in cells in the Bartholin’s glands just inside the opening of your vagina. This is also called Bartholin gland cancer. It can look like acyst. It also can form in sweat glands in the skin of your vulva or in the top layer of vulvar skin, which is called Paget’s disease. Melanoma.This type forms in cells that make pigment, or skin color. You’re more likely to get it on skin that’s exposed to the sun, but it sometimes forms on your vulva. Sarcoma.This starts inbone, muscle, or connective tissue cells. It can happen at any age, including in childhood. Basal cell carcinoma.This is the most common type ofskin cancer. It usually appears on skin that’s exposed to the sun, rarely on the vulva. The exact causes of vulvar cancer aren’t clear. But certain things can raise your chances of getting it. These include:  Your appointment might include:  If tests show signs of cancer, your doctor will look at how big the tumor is and whether it’s spread. This is called staging.  Treatment depends on many things, including the type of cancer, how far it’s spread, and your overall health. The four main treatments are:  After treatment, you’ll see your doctor often for follow-ups. You may need to have pelvic exams every 3 to 6 months for 2 years, and then every 6 to 12 months for 3 to 5 years. Your doctor might also recommend more screening tests. Your results will depend on the type of cancer and its stage. Overall, more than 70% of women who have vulvar cancer live at least 5 years after they’re diagnosed. The 5-year survival rate is 86% for women whose cancer hasn’t spread beyond their vulva. If it’s spread to nearby tissues or lymph nodes, the rate is 53%. Of women whose cancer has spread farther in their body, about 23% live 5 more years. Experts estimate that 1,350 women in the United States die of vulvar cancer each year. Side effects of vulvarcancer treatment Before you start treatment, talk to your doctor about what to expect, including possible side effects. Wound problems are common after vulvar surgery. It’s important to keep the area clean and practice good hygiene. Surgery, radiation, or chemo can also cause: Keep your medical team updated on any treatment side effects so they can help you manage them. Vulvar cancer andsex It’s common to have some sexual and psychological issues after treatment for vulvar cancer. Your body might look or feel different. You could have pain during sex and a hard time reachingorgasmor even peeing. Don’t hesitate to talk to your medical team about these changes and what steps you can take.Counselingcan help, or you might choose to have reconstructive surgery. You can lower your risk of vulvar cancer with a few lifestyle changes: SOURCES: American Cancer Society: “What Is Vulvar Cancer?” “Can Vulvar Cancer Be Prevented?” “Signs and Symptoms of Vulvar Cancers and Pre-Cancers,” “Vulvar Cancer.” National Cancer Institute: “Vulvar Cancer Treatment,” “Vulvar Cancer Treatment (PDQ) -- Patient Version.” Cleveland Clinic: “Vulvar Cancer.” Abramson Cancer Center of the University of Pennsylvania: “Side Effects of Vulvar Cancer & Cancer Treatment.” UpToDate: “Vaginal cancer.” American Society of Clinical Oncology: “Vulvar Cancer.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Vulvar Cancer.” OncoLink: “All About Vulvar Cancer.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.