Psychosisis a condition that affects the wayyour brainprocesses information. It causes you to lose touch with reality. You might see, hear, or believe things that aren’t real. Psychosis is a symptom, not an illness. It can be triggered by a mental illness, a physical injury or illness, substance abuse, or extreme stress or trauma. Psychotic disorders, likeschizophrenia, involve psychosis that usually affects you for the first time in the late teen years or early adulthood. Young people are especially likely to get it, but doctors don’t know why. Even before what doctors call the first episode of psychosis (FEP), you may show slight changes in the way you act or think. This is called the prodromal period and could last days, weeks, months, or even years. Sometimes you can lose touch with reality even when you don’t have a primary psychotic illness such asschizophreniaorbipolar disorder. When this happens, it's called secondarypsychosis. These episodes stem from something else, like drug use or a medical condition. Whatever the reason, they tend to disappear in a short time, and they often stay away if you treat the condition that caused them. Psychosis doesn’t suddenly start. It usually follows this pattern:  Doctors don’t know exactly what causes psychosis, but some known risk factors include: Psychosis can also be a symptom of amental illness, like schizophrenia orbipolar disorder. Drugs Bothdrugsthat depress the nervous system, likecannabis(marijuana), and stimulant drugs, like cocaine andamphetamines, can affectyour brainactivity in dramatic ways, so that what seems real to you doesn't match with the world. Most of the time, this goes away when you stop use of the drug. But there’s a strong link between all these drugs and primary psychosis. More than 25% of those who are diagnosed with amphetamine-induced psychosis later havepsychotic disorders. Cannabis is involved in roughly half of all cases. Studies suggest that these drugs may not so much cause psychosis as uncover the condition when it’s already present among people with psychiatric conditions, such as schizophrenic disorders or a family history of psychosis. Drugs used to treatmental illnesscan lead to problems as well. Although it’s rare, if you've been taking an antipsychotic (such aschlorpromazine,fluphenazine,haloperidol,perphenazine, and others) for many months or years, you could develop a movement disorder calltardive dyskinesiabecause of the long-term effects of the medication on your brain. And if you stop taking an antipsychotic medicine, you may get supersensitivity psychosis. Doctors think it happens because ongoing use of this type of drug changes how your brain responds to the chemical dopamine. Some antipsychotic medications, likearipiprazole(Abilify), carry an increased risk of psychosis. Most drug-triggered symptoms will clear up after the drug leaves your system. But psychosis from cocaine, PCP (aka angel dust), and amphetamines could last for weeks. While you wait for the episode to pass, your doctor can ease the symptoms with an anti-anxietydrug such as lorazepam (Ativan) or maybe an antipsychotic. Medical conditions Postictal psychosis (PIP)happens in some people withepilepsywho've had a number ofseizuresin a row. It's more likely when you've had aseizuredisorder for a long time or you've had mental illness in the past. Antipsychotic drugs likeolanzapineandrisperidonecan stop symptoms and may help prevent future episodes. Myxedematous psychosismay happen when yourthyroid glanddoesn't work well, known ashypothyroidism. Because of the way thyroidhormoneaffects your brain, you may havehallucinations,delusions, and changes to yoursense of tasteor smell if there's not enough in your body. Your doctor can test your level of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) to confirm myxedema psychosis and rule out other conditions like schizophrenia. Taking thyroid hormone can help balance your gland's activity and end the psychosis. Female hormone shifts Although it's extremely rare, some women havemenstrual psychosis. Out-of-balance hormones at different points in your cycle can affect thinking andmoods. This type of psychosis can appear at the beginning, aroundovulation, or during the few days before your period starts. Menstrual psychosis can show up quickly and can disappear just as fast. During the episodes, you may be confused about what's real,hallucinate, and believe things that aren't true. Cognitive behavioraltherapy(CBT) and antipsychotic drugs can help ward off your symptoms, even with hormone levels that are hard to predict. You can see apsychologist, psychiatrist, or a social worker. They’ll find out what might have caused your symptoms and look for related conditions. Doctors diagnose mental illnesses after ruling out other things that could be causing psychotic symptoms. It’s important to get treated early, after the first episode of psychosis. That will help keep the symptoms from affecting yourrelationships, work, or school. It may also help you avoid more problems down the road. Your doctor may recommend coordinated specialty care (CSC). This is a team approach to treating schizophrenia when the first symptoms appear. It combines medicine andtherapywith social services and work and education support. The family is involved as much as possible. What your doctor recommends will depend on the cause of your psychosis. Your doctor will prescribe antipsychotic drugs -- in pills, liquids, or shots -- to ease your symptoms. They’ll also suggest you avoid using drugs and alcohol. You might need to get treated in a hospital if you’re at risk of harming yourself or others, or if you can't control your behavior or do your daily activities. The doctor will check your symptoms, look for causes, and suggest the best treatment for you. Some clinics and programs offer help just for young people. Counseling, along with medicines, can also help manage psychosis.  SOURCES: National Alliance on Mental Illness: “Psychosis,” “Early Psychosis and Psychosis.” U.S. National Library of Medicine Medline Plus: “Psychotic Disorders.” National Institute of Mental Health: “Recovery After an Initial Schizophrenia Episode (RAISE) Questions & Answers,” “What is Psychosis?” Compton, M. and Broussard, B.The First Episode of Psychosis: A Guide for Patients and Their Families, published online, 2009. Cleveland Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions: Schizophrenia.” National Institute of Mental Health: “What is Psychosis?” Center for Cognition & Recovery: “What is Cognitive Enhancement Therapy?” World Psychiatry: "Secondary Psychoses: An Update." American Journal of Psychiatry: “Rates and Predictors of Conversion to Schizophrenia or Bipolar Disorder Following Substance-Induced Psychosis.” BMC Psychiatry: “Amphetamine-induced psychosis -- a separate diagnostic entity or primary psychosis triggered in the vulnerable?” Merck Manual: "Substance/Medication–Induced Psychotic Disorder," "Brief Psychotic Disorder," "Shared Psychosis." Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics: "Antipsychotic-Induced Dopamine Supersensitivity Psychosis: Pharmacology, Criteria, and Therapy." University of Pittsburgh Medical Center: "How Brain Chemicals Influence Mood and Health." General Medicine Open Access: "A Case of Menstruation Related Psychosis -- A Rare Entity." Journal of Women’s Health: “A Review of Postpartum Psychosis.” Annals of General Psychiatry: "Postictal Psychosis: Presymptomatic Risk Factors and the Need for Further Investigation of Genetics and Pharmacotherapy." The Primary Care Companion to the Journal of Clinical Psychiatry: "Hypothyroidism Presenting as Psychosis: Myxedema Madness Revisited." Indian Journal of Psychiatry: “Cannabis and psychosis: Neurobiology.” Tremor and Other Hyperkinetic Movements: “An Update on Tardive Dyskinesia: From Phenomenology to Treatment.” Famous faces you may recognize. Be aware of these warning signs. The real truth on this condition. Symptoms of schizoaffective disorder. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.