Breastmilk is full of good things that babies need -- key nutrients, hormones, andantibodiesthat protect them from disease and keep them healthy. But some babies are born withgalactosemia. It’s a rare metabolic condition that prevents them from processing galactose (one of the sugars inbreastmilk andformula) and turning it into energy. The disorder can cause many problems for newborns and can be life-threatening if left untreated. It’s easy to test for galactosemia. It’s also simple to treat once it’s diagnosed. And children who have it can live normal lives. Galactosemia is hereditary. Both parents must pass it down for their child to get it. If yourbabyhas this condition, it means the genes that produce the enzymes to break down galactose into glucose (asugar) are missing key parts. Without these parts, the genes can’t tell the enzymes to do their job. This causes galactose to build up in theblood, creating problems, especially for newborns. There are three main types of galactosemia: Type I occurs in about 1 in every 30,000 to 60,000 people. Type II and type III are less common. As a parent or potential parent, you and your partner can be genetically screened for galactosemia. If you’re acarrier, it doesn’t mean you have to avoid galactose. But it means you can pass galactosemia along to your children. If yournewbornhas classic galactosemia, they’ll appear normal at birth. Symptoms start to show up within a few days after they begin to drink breast milk or formula with lactose -- the milksugarthat contains galactose. Yourbabyfirst loses their appetite and startsvomiting. Then they getjaundice, a yellowing of theskinand the whites of theireyes.Diarrheais common, too. The disease leads to severeweight lossand yourbabystruggles to grow and thrive. Without treatment, over time your child may developcataractsand can be susceptible to infections. They may haveliverdamage andkidneyproblems. Theirbrainmay not mature well. That can causedevelopmental disabilities. Some children have issues with their motor skills and muscles. For girls, it can cause theirovariesto stop working. Most with this condition can’t have children. Every baby born at a U.S. hospital is given what’s called anewborn screening. Abloodsample is taken from a heel stick (a tiny cut in the baby’sfoot) and it is tested for several conditions. Galactosemia is one of them. If your baby shows signs of the illness, your doctor will suggest a follow-up test to confirm. This test will include both a blood andurinesample. If your child has galactosemia, your doctor will work with you to plan a diet. Lactose and galactose are taken out of their diet. Instead, they’re given soy-based formula and must avoid milk or milk byproducts. Though a person with galactosemia will never be able to process this type of sugar, they can live normal lives if the disease is caught early enough. Along with eliminating dairy, your doctor may recommend cutting out some fruits, vegetables, and candies that contain galactose. In addition, your child may need to take vitamin and mineralsupplementssuch ascalcium,vitamin C,vitamin D, andvitamin K. Some babies have a form of the condition called Duarte galactosemia (DG), which is milder than the classic form (type I). Babies with DG may have some issues processing galactose but a recent showed that changing the diet change may not be necessary and most babies do fine continuing breastfeeding or continuing formula with galactose.. Babies with type II or type III also will have fewer issues than babies with classic galactosemia. However, they still can developcataracts,kidneyandliverissues, and have delayed growth. Girls with galactosemia may requirehormonetreatment when they reachpuberty. It’s important that parents of a child with galactosemia work with ahealth careteam to find ways to help them live with the condition and its effects on their daily life. SOURCES: Womenshealth.gov: “Breastfeeding.” American Liver Foundation: “Galactosemia.” Galactosemia Foundation: “What Is Galactosemia?” Babysfirsttest.org: “Classic galactosemia.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Galactosemia.” NIH Genetics Home Reference: “Galactosemia.” Boston Children’s Hospital: “Galactosemia Symptom & Causes.” Socialstyrelsen (Sweden): “Galactosemia.” Mount Sinai Hospital: “Galactosemia.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.