Your doctor might suggest this type of treatment if you’ve had an injury or illness that makes it hard to do daily tasks. Physical therapy(PT) is care that aims to easepainand help you function, move, and live better. You may need it to: People of all ages benefit from physical therapy. It can treat a variety of health problems. These licensed health professionals engage in specific graduate training in physical therapy. You may hear them called PTs or physiotherapists.  As of2016, to be eligible to sit for the national exam, you need to graduate from an accredited higher educational institution with a Doctor of Physical Therapy (DPT) degree. An additional state exam must also be passed to earn a license. Physical therapists evaluate your condition and develop a care plan that guides your therapy. They may perform hands-on treatments for your symptoms. They also teach you special exercises to help you move and function better. In most states, you can go directly to a physical therapist without a referral from your doctor. Or your doctor might prescribe it. Check yourinsurancepolicy to see if you need a prescription to cover the cost. If you have a serious illness or injury, a PT won’t take the place of other doctors, but they will work with your doctors and otherhealth careprofessionals to guide treatments. You’ll feel better and you’ll be more likely to get back full function in the area being treated, and in most cases, faster than without the guidance of a PT.  PTs often have assistants. They’re also trained to do many types of physical treatments. At your first therapy session, your PT will examine and assess your needs. They’ll ask you questions about your pain or other symptoms, your ability to move or do everyday tasks, how well yousleep, and your medical history. The objective is to determine a diagnosis of your condition, why you have the condition, including impairments that either caused or are a result of the condition then develop a plan of care to address each. The PT will administer tests to measure: Then, they’ll work with you to create a treatment plan. It will include your personal goals like functioning and feeling better, plus exercises or other treatments to help you reach them. You may take less or more time to reach those goals than other people in physical therapy. Everyone is different. You may also have more or fewer sessions than others. It just depends on your needs. You treatments might include: Your therapist will watch your progress and adjust your treatments as necessary. You can do the exercises your therapist teaches you at home between sessions. This will help you stay on track and improve yourfitness. PTs sometimes come to your home to guide your therapy. They also work in: SOURCES: American Physical Therapy Association. Burke Rehabilitation Hospital: “10 Reasons Why Physical Therapy Is Beneficial.” American College of Rheumatology: “The Role of the Physical Therapist in the Management of Rheumatic Disease.” Hospital for Special Surgery: “Ask the Expert: When to See a Physical Therapist.” Rasmussen College: “What Does a Physical Therapy Assistant Do? Baylor Scott & White Health: “Your First Appointment in Physical Therapy.” Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.