Prolapse is when any body part slips or falls down from its normal position. Rectal prolapse is when your rectum -- the last section of your large intestine -- drops down or slides out of youranus. While that may sound scary, it’s typically not considered a medical emergency. However, the longer you have the condition, the worse it can get. Living with rectal prolapse can cause embarrassment and affect your quality of life. If you feel like something just isn’t right when you go to the bathroom, or try topoop, you shouldn’t ignore it or make light of it. Your doctor can diagnose rectal prolapse and suggest treatment to fix it. There are three types of prolapse: If you feel like you’re sitting on a ball after pooping, or if you notice that you have something sticking out of the opening (your anus) where you poop, you could have rectal prolapse. Typically, you’ll first experience rectal prolapse after you have a bowel movement. The first time, or first few times, the rectum may return inside on its own. Later, you may feel like something has fallen out of your body, or you just feel something down there that isn’t normal. In those cases, you may be able to push the rectum back in yourself. Additional symptoms of rectal prolapse can include: Early on, rectal prolapse may look likehemorrhoidsslipping out of your anal opening, but these are two different conditions. Hemorrhoids are swollen blood vessels in your anus or lower rectum that may cause itching, pain, and blood on the toilet paper when you wipe after you poop. Your doctor can diagnose whether you have rectal prolapse or hemorrhoids. A variety of things can cause the condition, including: More women develop rectal prolapse than men, especially women older than 50. In general, older people who have had a history of constipation or problems with their pelvic floor have a higher chance of having the problem. Any of these health conditions could put you at higher risk for rectal prolapse: Your doctor can do a rectal exam. While you may hesitate to do this, your doctor may ask you to sit on a toilet and poop or at least try to go. This is helpful because it allows your doctor to see the prolapse. You may need some other, more advanced tests to diagnose rectal prolapse, especially if you have other related conditions: The most common treatment for rectal prolapse is surgery to put the rectum back in place, and there are several types. The kind of surgery your doctor recommends will depend on factors such as your overall health, age, and how serious your condition is. The two most common types of surgery: If your rectal prolapse is very minor and it is caught early, your doctor might have you treat it by taking stool softeners to make it easier to go to the bathroom and by pushing the rectum’s tissue back up the anus by hand. But, typically, you will eventually need to have surgery to fix rectal prolapse. To prevent rectal prolapse, try not to strain when you poop. Try these tips to ease or prevent constipation that leads to straining: Avoid heavy lifting, as this could put pressure on your bowel muscles. Rectal prolapse, if it’s not treated, could lead to these complications: SOURCES: Foundation of the American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons: Rectal Prolapse Expanded Version. Cleveland Clinic: “Rectal Prolapse.” Mayo Clinic: “Rectal Prolapse Surgery.” American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Laparoscopy.” American Society of Colon and Rectal Surgeons: “Rectal Prolapse.” Victoria State Government Better Health: “Rectal Prolapse.” University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center: “What Is Rectal Prolapse?” Cedars-Sinai Hospital: “Rectal Prolapse: What is rectal prolapse?” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.