Kawasaki diseaseis an illness that causesbloodvessels to become inflamed, almost always in young children. It’s one of the leadingcauses of heart diseasein kids. But doctors can treat it if they find it early. Most children recover without any problems. Theinflammationof Kawasaki disease can damage a child’s coronary arteries, which carry blood to theirheart. It can also cause problems withlymph nodes,skin, and the lining of a child’smouth, nose, and throat. Scientists haven’t found an exact cause for Kawasaki disease. It might be linked to genes, viruses, bacteria, and other things in the world around a child, such as chemicals and irritants. The disease probably isn’t contagious, but it sometimes happens in clusters in a community. Kids are more likely to get it in the winter and spring. Other things can raise a child’s risk of Kawasaki disease, including:  Kawasaki disease comes on fast, and symptoms show up in phases. Signs of the first phase of Kawasaki disease include: In the second phase, symptoms include: Kawasaki disease can causehearttrouble 10 days to 2 weeks after symptoms start. Symptoms tend to go away slowly in the third phase. It might last as long as 8 weeks. Call your doctor if your child has these symptoms, including a fever between 101 and 103 F that lasts more than 4 days. Early treatment can help lower their risk of lasting effects. Your doctor will do aphysical examand ask about your child’s symptoms. They’ll look for a long-lasting fever and at least four of these five signs: They may need to do tests to rule out other illnesses or to see whether the condition has affected your child’s heart. These include:  Your child may have a lot of pain from the fever, swelling, andskin problems. Their doctor might prescribe medication to make them feel better, such asaspirinand drugs that preventblood clots. Don’t give your child any medication without talking to your doctor first. The doctor will probably also give them immune globulin into a vein (intravenous, or IV). This has proteins called antibodies to help fight infection. It’s more effective when a child takes it withaspirinthan aspirin is alone. It will lower a child’s risk of heart issues when they get it early on in treatment. Most children start treatment for Kawasaki disease in a hospital because of a risk of complications. Because it involves a child’s heart, this illness can be scary. But most kids recover completely and have no lasting problems. In rare cases, children can have: These can lead to other troubles, including weak or bulging artery walls. These are called aneurysms. They could raise a child’s risk ofarteryblockages, which can causeinternal bleedingandheart attacks. An echocardiogram can show many of these complications. In severe cases, a child might need surgery. Infants have a higher risk of serious complications. In the U.S., fewer than 1% of children die during the early illness. After the early symptoms go away, follow up with your child’s doctor to be sure their heart is working the way it should. They may need more X-rays, echocardiograms, EKGs, or other tests. Photo Credit: ISM / Medical Images SOURCES: American Heart Association: “Kawasaki Disease.” Centers for Disease Control: “Kawasaki Disease.” Kawasaki Disease Foundation: “What Is Kawasaki Disease?” “Kawasaki Disease Frequently Asked Questions.” Mayo Clinic: “Heart Disease,” “Kawasaki Disease.” Vasculitis Foundation: “Kawasaki Disease.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Kawasaki Disease.” Arthritis Foundation: “Kawasaki Disease.” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Photo Caption Nemours KidsHealth - Photo Caption Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.