When your inner ear gets infected or inflamed, it can cause a type of balance disorder known as labyrinthitis. Sometimes you can get it when you have an upper respiratory infection, likethe flu. Innerear infectionsthat lead tolabyrinthitisare usually caused by a virus. Sometimes bacteria can cause it, too. The symptoms of viral andbacterial infectionscan be so similar that a doctor needs to confirm which type you have before they can treat it. Your innerearcontains a system of loopy tubes and sacs called the labyrinth. It contains some fluid andhaircells. It also controls your balance and hearing. An infection can disrupt information that flows from this area to yourbrain. Labyrinthitis can not only affect your hearing, it can also make you feel dizzy. You might experience something more severe, likevertigo. This is the sudden feeling that you or the inside of your head is spinning. Other symptoms might include: Symptoms often appear without warning. For instance, you might notice them when you wake up one morning. This can be scary. If you feel lightheaded, or have trouble with your balance orvision, call your doctor or go to the ER right away. This form of the infection is more common than bacterial. But doctors know less about it. Some viruses seem to be linked. These includemeasles,mumps,hepatitis, and the types ofherpesthat causecold sores,chicken pox, orshingles. If you have viral labyrinthitis, it usually will affect only one ear. It might quickly run its course and seem to go away. But it can return without warning. This can happen in one of two ways: First, bacteria from a middleear infectionmake toxins that get into the inner ear and causeinflammationand swelling. Or second, an infection in the bones surrounding the inner ear makes toxins that cause the same symptoms. A chronic, or ongoing, middle ear infection can cause it. A more severe and uncommon type of bacterial labyrinthitis occurs when germs invade the labyrinth from outside the ear. A condition likebacterial meningitiscan be the cause of this type. There aren’t any specific tests that let your doctor know you have labyrinthitis. They’ll first rule out other conditions that mimic it. They may want to test for health issues like: If your doctor rules out bacteria as the cause, they might prescribe antiviral meds or those that control swelling.Steroidslikecortisonecan help, too. You might also need medication to treat your symptoms, such asnauseaor vertigo. Special exercises can help you regain your balance. Aphysical therapyprogram that focuses on this can speed up your recovery. It might take a while -- from a few weeks to months -- but most people recover completely from labyrinthitis. It’s possible to have another bout of vertigo later on. This can happen if you turn over in bed or even tilt your head a certain way. Physical therapy can help you get better. It may, but it might be a milder case. Your doctor likely will look for another cause for your symptoms at this point. SOURCES: U.S. National Library of Medicine (PubMed Health): “Labyrinthitis.” National Institutes of Health: “Balance Disorders.” Vestibular Disorders Association: “Labyrinthitis and Vestibular Neuritis.” Mayo Clinic: “Benign Paroxysmal Positional Vertigo.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Labyrinthitis.” Mayo Clinic: “Dizziness: Lifestyle and Home Remedies.” Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.