Buerger’s disease is a rare illness that inflames and blocks blood vessels in your arms and legs. This stopsbloodflow and leads to clots that affect your hands andfeet. Doctors also call itthromboangiitis obliterans, or TAO. There’s no cure for Buerger’s disease. Almost everyone who gets it usestobacco, including cigarettes,cigars, chewing tobacco, and snuff. Quitting can make the symptoms improve or go away completely. If you don’t quit, you might have severe tissue damage. You could even lose your fingers, toes, or parts of your limbs. Doctors aren’t sure exactly what causes this condition. Your genes might play a role. Some people may just be more likely to get it. Some experts think that certain chemicals in tobacco might irritate your blood vessels, and that’s what makes them swell. Others think tobacco triggers yourimmune systemto attack your blood vessels like they’re bad germs. Usually, the first sign of Buerger’s disease ispainin your hands or feet that spreads to your arms and legs. It may be severe. You can get it when you’re active (called claudication) or resting. It can be worse when you’re cold or stressed. You might also notice changes in your hands and feet. They may: Your fingers and toes might: You could also have swelling along a vein just under your skin. This is usually a sign of ablood clot. See your doctor right away. Over time, Buerger’s disease can slow -- and completely stop -- the blood flow to your fingers and toes. This can causegangrene, which means the skin and tissue in your toes and fingers start to die. They go numb and turn blue or black. If you have gangrene, your doctor usually has to cut off the affected area. In rare cases, Buerger’s disease can cause astrokeorheart attack. No single test can check for Buerger’s disease. Your doctor will start by asking about your tobacco use and your symptoms. They may do tests to check your blood flow and rule out other diseases that cause similar symptoms. For example,peripheral artery diseasealso causes pain in your legs, but it’s caused by plaque building up in yourarteries, notinflammation. You may also have:  Quitting tobacco is the only way to limit the effects of Buerger’s disease. Even a few cigarettes a day can make it worse. Other treatments may help boost blood flow and ease pain, including: Your doctor might need to cut off part or all of an area with infection or gangrene (amputation). Researchers are also studying other treatments. Proteins called growth factors might speed healing and ease pain. Injections ofstem cells, which can grow into other kinds of cells, may help your body make new blood vessels. Your outlook depends on whether you quit tobacco. Of patients who keep using it, about 43% will have an amputation within 8 years of diagnosis. Of those who quit, about 6% have an amputation. That percentage is close to 0 in people who are diagnosed early on. If you’re having a hard time quitting, talk to your doctor about programs that might help. SOURCES: CDC: “Health Effects of Cigarette Smoking.” CDC: “Smoking and Buerger’s Disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Buerger’s Disease.” The Johns Hopkins Vasculitis Center: “Buerger’s Disease.” UC Davis Vascular Center: “Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangitis Obliterans).” National Organization of Rare Disorders: “Buerger’s Disease.” Vasculitis Foundation: “Buerger’s Disease.” Penn Medicine: “Buerger’s Disease (Thromboangitis Obliterans).” UpToDate: “Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger’s disease).” NYU Langone Health: “Types of Vasculitis.” ePlasty, Open Access Journal of Plastic Surgery: “Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger’s Disease).” National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Buerger disease.” Medscape: “Thromboangiitis Obliterans (Buerger Disease).” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.