Torticollisis a problem involving the muscles of the neck that causes the head to tilt down. The term comes from two Latin words:tortus,which means twisted, andcollum,which means neck.Sometimes it’s called “wryneck.” If yourbabyhas the condition at birth, it’s called congenital muscular torticollis. That’s the most common type. Babies can also develop the condition after birth. Then it’s called “acquired,” rather than congenital. Acquired torticollis may be linked to other, more serious medical issues. You have a long muscle on each side of your neck that runs from the back of yourearto your collarbone. It is called the sternocleidomastoid, or SCM. When yourbabyhas torticollis, this ropy muscle is shortened on one side. Why does the muscle become shortened? Yourbabymight have been cramped in the womb or may have been in an abnormal position, such as a breech position. That can put extra pressure on one side of yourinfant’s head, which can cause the SCM to tighten. If your doctor used forceps or a vacuum device during delivery, those also might have put pressure on your baby’s SCM. You may not notice anything unusual about your baby for the first 6 or 8 weeks. It’s common for torticollis symptoms to become obvious once an infant gains more control of the head and neck. Some of the symptoms you might see: If you notice signs that look like your baby might have torticollis, set up an exam with your doctor. The doctor will start by checking how far your baby’s head will turn. They also may order imaging scans, such as X-rays andultrasound, to check for other conditions. About 1 in 5 babies with torticollis will also have a hip problem. Most babies with torticollis don’t have other medical problems. But it is sometimes linked to infections, broken bones, allergic reactions to medicines, or genetic conditions such asDown syndromeor Klippel-Feil syndrome (a rare bone disorder of the neck). If you act early, you can help prevent any long-term problems for your baby. Without treatment, your baby might get complications, including: Try to get your baby to stretch those neck muscles. It’s the best treatment for torticollis, and it’s safe. The doctor may teach you some specific exercises to do with your little one. These moves will help lengthen the tighter, short muscle and also strengthen the muscle on the opposite side. Here are some other things you can do at home: In addition to home treatment, your doctor may want your baby to see a physical therapist. Once torticollis is diagnosed andstretching exercisesstart, most babies improve within 6 months. Two things can speed recovery: an early diagnosis and sticking to the treatment plan. Very rarely, children with torticollis will need surgery to lengthen the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Doctors will usually wait until your child is a preschooler to consider this option. SOURCES: Boston Children’s Hospital: “Conditions and Treatments -- Torticollis.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Congenital Muscular Torticollis.” KidsHealth.org (The Nemours Foundation): “Infant Torticollis.” Hospital for Special Surgery: “Congenital Muscular Torticollis -- An overview.” Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America: “Study Guide -- Congenital Muscular Torticollis.” NIH. U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Klippel-Feil syndrome.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.