Everyone has certain bacteria, called enterococci, that live in theirintestinesand genital tract. They’re also found in the environment. Most of the time they don’t cause any problems, but sometimes they can trigger infections. When they do, they’re treated with a powerful antibiotic calledvancomycin. Sometimes, the bacteria become resistant to the antibiotic. That means they can live even though the drug is designed to kill them. These superbugs are called vancomycin-resistant enterococci, or VRE. They’re dangerous because they’re more difficult to treat than regular infections. An estimated 20,000 people in the United States become infected with it each year. A little fewer than 10% of people who get it die from it. People who stay in a hospital have the highest odds of getting VRE. That’s partly because infections that don’t respond toantibioticsspread most easily in places where the drugs are used most often. But you might also have a greater chance of developing a VRE infection if you: VRE comes with a number of symptoms. Yours might actually be caused not by VRE, but by other infections it can trigger, likeurinary tract infections, bloodstream infections, and wound infections. The time between when you’re infected and when you develop symptoms varies, too. Your doctor will take a sample from the affected area and send it to a lab. If the sample tests positive -- meaning you have VRE -- they’ll do more tests to find out which antibiotic will best treat it. These superbugs can live on hard surfaces for some time. So wipe down counters, bathrooms, and other areas of your home that are easy resting places for them. Wash your handswith soap and water after using the bathroom and before making food -- especially if you’re in contact with someone who has VRE. A good rule of thumb is to wash up long enough to sing “Happy Birthday to You” twice. Wear gloves if you’re working in close contact with bodily fluids -- like stool or bandages from infected wounds -- that may contain VRE. Alwayswash your handsafter taking off your gloves. If someone in your care has it, let their healthcare providers know so they can take steps to protect themselves, too. SOURCES: CDC: “Healthcare-associated Infections.” North Dakota Department of Health: “VRE (Vancomycin Resistant Enterococcus).” Public Health Agency of Canada: “Vancomycin-resistant Enterococci (VRE).” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.