Acute kidney failure is when your kidneys stop working suddenly. Doctors sometimes call it acute renal failure. It can happen over just a few hours or days. Acute kidney failure isn’t always permanent. If you get treatment right away -- and if you don’t have other serious health problems -- your kidneys can go back to working normally. The main job of your kidneys is to filter waste out of yourblood. They also remove extra fluid from yourblood(this becomes urine) and controlblood pressure.Kidneyshelp make red blood cells. They regulateelectrolytes(a type of nutrient) and activatevitamin D, too. Kidneys don’t work well when they’re damaged. This could happen because of another health condition, likediabetes. A decrease in kidney function that happens over a longer period of time is called chronickidney disease (CKD). You may not have any symptoms of acute kidney failure. Your doctor may discover you have this condition while doing lab tests for another reason. If you do have symptoms, they’ll depend on how bad your loss of kidney function is, how quickly you lose kidney function, and the reasons for your kidney failure. Symptoms may include: There are three main reasons your kidneys fail all of a sudden: Something is changing the way blood flows through to your kidneys. It could be because of: Most of the time, kidney failure happens along with another medical condition or event. If you fall into any of the following categories, you may have a greater chance of acute kidney failure: Your doctor will start with aphysical exam. Then, they’ll order tests of your blood, urine, and kidneys. Blood tests. These measure substances in your blood. Urine tests. Your doctor will check your pee for blood and protein. They’ll also look for certain electrolytes. The results help your doctor understand what’s causing your kidney failure. Kidney biopsy (renal biopsy)is a procedure where the doctor pushes a thin needle through your skin and takes a small piece of your kidney to look at under a microscope.  It can show if there is any damage or disease in your kidney, and frequently what the cause is. This is typically done only in cases where it is unclear what is causing the kidney failure. Imaging tests. Some tests, like ultrasonography or aCT scan, can show whether your kidneys are enlarged or there’s a blockage in your urine flow. They can also tell your doctor if there is any problem with arteries or veins going in and out of your kidneys. AnMRIcan show this, too. Often, treatment for acute kidney failure, especially if severe, requires hospitalization. If there aren’t any other problems, the kidneys may heal themselves. In most other cases, acute kidney failure can be treated if it’s caught early. It may involve changes to your diet, the use of medications, intravenous fluids, relief of any obstruction that is blocking kidneys, or even dialysis. Acute kidney failure can sometimes cause complications. These include: You can reduce your risk of getting acute kidney failure by practicing some healthy habits. SOURCES: American Kidney Fund: “Kidney Failure/ESRD.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Kidney Failure.” Mayo Clinic: “Acute Kidney Failure,” “Low potassium (hypokalemia).” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Kidney Disease: What to Expect.” Merck Manuals: “Acute Kidney Injury.” University of New Mexico health Sciences Center: “Electrolyte Imbalance.” Hopkins Medicine: “Health Home, Treatment, Tests and Therapies, 24-Hour Urine Collection.” National Health Service, UK: “Acute Kidney Injury, Complications of Acute Kidney Injury.” National Kidney Foundation: “Creatinine: What Is It?” “What is Hyperkalemia?” “Why increased serum potassium level in CKD patients?” Harvard Health Publishing: “Potassium and sodium out of balance.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.