Chikungunyais a virus that's spread bymosquitoes. You can't get it from another person, but mosquitoes do get it from biting a person who is infected. Most people don't die from it, but you could have some lasting pain. In fact, the name of the chikungunya virus in the African Makonde language means "bent over in pain." It's been seen in as many as 60 countries in Asia, Europe, Africa, and the Americas. The chikungunya virus isn't common in the U.S., compared to other countries.Cases of the virus were reported starting in 2014 among travelers returning to the U.S. from affected areas. Since then, rare cases of local transmission have been reported in Florida, Texas, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. The chikungunya virus is spread by the yellow fever mosquito and the Asian tiger mosquito, which are in the Southeastern U.S., and parts of the Southwestern U.S. The Asian tiger mosquito is also found along the East Coast and in the lower Midwestern U.S. You may see signs of chikungunya around 3 to 7 days after you’re bitten. Chikungunya symptoms typically include fever andjoint pain.You also might have aheadache,nausea, red eyes, arash,and be very tired. It can be hard to know for sure that you have chikungunya because it can look like other illnesses spread bymosquitoes, such asdengue feveror theZika virus. See your doctor if you have these symptoms, especially if you  have been somewhere that’s recently had an outbreak or live in an area where it has been reported.  The doctor will take a sample of yourbloodto check for signs that your body is fighting off the virus. There is a test in the U.S. that can check for chikungunya, the Zika virus, and dengue. After you're tested, your doctor will advise you on how to treat your symptoms. There’s no antiviral chikungunya treatment–or treatment that can kill the virus itself. There's no vaccine to prevent it, either. Doctors just treat symptoms. Acetaminophenwill help with pain and fever, but you shouldn't take any of the following medicines until you rule out similar infections (like dengue): Drink plenty of liquids and get a lot of rest. If you have joint and muscle pain that won't go away, your doctor may give you steroids or medicines such as methotrexate that are used to treat conditions like rheumatoid arthritis.  Most people don't die from the virus. In fact, you'll probably recover in a few weeks.Acute symptoms usually end after 7 to 10 days. There can be long-term effects from getting the chikungunya virus. Some people have lasting joint and/or muscle pain that can last for months–and in some cases, it lasts for years. That's called chronic chikungunya arthritis. About 40% of people who get the virus get arthritis from it. The virus is typically harder on newborns, people over 65, and people who havehigh blood pressure,diabetes, orheart disease. If you or someone you know has symptoms and is in one of these groups, call your doctor right away. If you get the chikungunya virus, you're likely to be protected from getting it again.  If you’re going to a place that has an outbreak, you can do some things to lower your chances of being bitten by mosquitoes: SOURCES: Pan American Health Organization: "Chikungunya." "New CDC Laboratory Test for Zika Virus Authorized for Emergency Use by FDA," CDC. Mayo Clinic: “What is Chikungunya Fever, and Should I Be Worried?” Baylor University College of Medicine: "Chikungunya Virus." World Health Organization: “Chikungunya: Fact Sheet.” CDC: "Chikungunya Virus," "Chikungunya in the U.S.," "Prevention,” “Symptoms, Diagnosis, & Treatment,” "Transmission,”  “2016 Provisional Data For The United States.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.