Preeclampsia, formerly called toxemia, is when pregnant women havehigh blood pressure, protein in their urine, and swelling in their legs, feet, and hands. It can range from mild to severe. It usually happens late inpregnancy, though it can come earlier or just after delivery. Preeclampsia can lead to eclampsia, a serious condition that can have health risks for mom and baby and, in rare cases, cause death. If your preeclampsia leads toseizures, you have eclampsia. The only cure for preeclampsia is to give birth. Even after delivery, symptoms of preeclampsia can last 6 weeks or more. You can help protect yourself by learning the symptoms of preeclampsia and by seeing your doctor for regular prenatal care. Catching preeclampsia early may lower the chances of long-term problems for both mom and baby. In addition to swelling (also called edema), protein in the urine, andblood pressureover 140/90,preeclampsia symptomsinclude: Some women with preeclampsia don’t have any symptoms, so it’s important to see your doctor for regular blood pressure checks and urine tests. Preeclampsia can happen as early as 20 weeks into pregnancy, but that’s rare. Symptoms often begin after 34 weeks. In a few cases, symptoms develop after birth, usually within 48 hours of delivery. They tend to go away on their own. Many experts think preeclampsia and eclampsia happen when a woman’s placenta doesn’t work the way it should, but they don’t know exactly why. Some think poornutritionor high body fat might contribute. A lack ofbloodflow to the uterus could play a role. Genes are also a factor. Preeclampsia is one of four blood pressure disorders in pregnant women. The other three are: Things that can increase your chance of getting preeclampsia include: Preeclampsia can keep your placenta from getting enoughblood, which can cause your baby to be born very small. This is called fetal growth restriction. It’s also one of the most common causes ofpremature birthsand the complications that can follow, includinglearning disabilities,epilepsy,cerebral palsy, and hearing andvisionproblems. Preeclampsia can cause rare but serious complications that include: When preeclampsia or eclampsia damages your liver and blood cells, you can get a complication called HELLP syndrome. That stands for: HELLP syndrome is a medical emergency. Call 911 or go to the emergency room if you have symptoms including: Preeclampsia can also cause your placenta to suddenly separate from your uterus, which is calledplacental abruption. This can lead to stillbirth. You have preeclampsia if you have high blood pressure and at least one of these other signs: To confirm a diagnosis, your doctor might give you tests including: The only cure for preeclampsia and eclampsia is to give birth. Your doctor will talk with you about when to deliver based on how far along your baby is, how well your baby is doing in your womb, and the severity of your preeclampsia. If your baby has developed well,usually by 37 weeks or later, your doctor may want toinduce laboror do acesarean section. This will keep preeclampsia from getting worse. If your baby isn’t close to term,you and your doctor may be able to treatmildpreeclampsia until your baby has developed enough to be safely delivered. The closer the birth is to yourdue date, the better it is for your baby. If you have mild preeclampsia,also known as preeclampsia without severe features, your doctor may prescribe: Your doctor also may tell you to stay in the hospital so they can watch you closely. In the hospital, you might get: Other treatments include: For severe preeclampsia,your doctor may need to deliver your baby right away, even if you're not close to term. Afterward, symptoms of preeclampsia should go away within 1 to 6 weeks but could last longer. If you have a greater chance of getting preeclampsia, talk to your doctor about making lifestyle changes that can help keep you healthy. You might need to: Your doctor might also tell you to take a low-dose (81 milligram) aspirin each day. But don’t take any medications, vitamins, or supplements without talking to them first. SOURCES: March of Dimes: "Preeclampsia," “HELLP Syndrome.” eMedicine: "Preeclampsia." Patients Up to Date: "Preeclampsia." University of Maryland: "Preeclampsia." MedLine Plus: "Preeclampsia." Preeclampsia Foundation: “Signs & Symptoms,” “What Is Superimposed Preeclampsia?” “FAQs.” American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Preeclampsia and High Blood Pressure During Pregnancy.” Mayo Clinic: “Preeclampsia.” National Center for Advancing Transitional Sciences Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “HELLP syndrome.” Obstetrics & Gynecology: “ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 202: Gestational Hypertension and Preeclampsia.” Cleveland Clinic: “Preeclampsia.” University of Michigan: “Preeclampsia: Creatinine Clearance Test.” UpToDate: “Preeclampsia: Clinical features and diagnosis.” Patients Up to Date: "Preeclampsia."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.