Whipple’s disease was first recognized in 1907 by George Hoyt Whipple. The case centered on a man who had problems withweight loss,arthritis, chroniccough, andfever. More than a century later, doctors still don’t know much about the disease, but they do have ways to treat it. Whipple’s disease is abacterial infection. The bacteria usually affect yourdigestive system, especially your small intestine, but they can cause problems in other parts of your body, too, like yourheart, joints,lungs,eyes, andimmune system. And up to 40% of people with Whipple’s disease also have issues related to their nervous system, which includesyour brain, spinal cord, and the network of nerves that run throughout your body. If it’s not treated, Whipple’s disease can be life-threatening in a short amount of time. Doctors only know of a few hundred cases of the condition, most in North America and western Europe. White men and people older than 40 are most likely to get it. Whipple’s disease can affect how you digest food and take in nutrients. It can make you weak andtiredand lead to: If it affects your nervous system, it can bring on: In some people, Whipple's disease can causecoughing, fever, andchest pain. Bacteria calledT. whippleicause Whipple’s disease. Scientists aren’t exactly sure how the bacteria get in your body, but they think it may be a part of some people’s normal mix of bacteria or it may come in through yourmouth. There’s no evidence that it can be passed from person to person. Researchers have found that many people with the disease work with or near soil, like on farms or in construction, or have a problem with their immune system. It also may be linked to a problem gene. If your doctor thinks you might have Whipple’s disease, they’ll talk with you about your medical history and do aphysical examto check for pain or tenderness in your belly or dark spots on your skin. They’ll also test a sample of yourbloodto see if you’re low on any nutrients. They’ll probably recommend a procedure called an upper GIendoscopy-- a flexible tube with a camera on the end lets your doctor get a closer look at the lining of yourstomachand take a sample to be tested forT. whipplei. You’ll get medicine to help you relax during the procedure. If tests show that you have Whipple’s disease, your doctor will give youantibioticsthrough an IV in your arm to kill the bacteria. They also may recommend fluids to keep you hydrated and extravitaminsand minerals to make sure you get enough nutrients. You should feel better in a couple of weeks, but it may take your small intestine up to 2 years to recover. During that time, you’ll continue to take antibiotics and supplements. If you have problems related to your nervous system, your doctor will use a combination of antibiotics,steroids, and otherdrugs, depending on your symptoms. Whipple’s disease can come back. You’ll need to see your doctor for regular checkups so you can treat it quickly if it does. SOURCES: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Whipple’s Disease Information Page.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Whipple Disease.” Medscape: “Whipple Disease.” Mount Sinai Hospital Department of Microbiology: “Tropheryma whippelii.” Gastroenterology & Hepatology:“Connecting the Dots: The Many Systemic Manifestations of Whipple Disease.” National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences: “Whipple disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Whipple’s disease.” Canadian Journal of Infectious Diseases and Medical Microbiology:“Rare but not so rare: The evolving spectrum of Whipple’s disease.” Journal of Infection:“Tropheryma whipplei and Whipple’s disease.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.