Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic disorder, which means you get if from your parents at birth. It affects the way your body makes mucus, a substance that helps your organs and systems work. Mucus should be thin and slippery, but when you have CF, it becomes thick and glue-like. This blocks tubes and ducts throughout your body. Over time, this thick mucus builds up inside your airways. This makes it hard to breathe. The mucus traps germs and leads to infections. It can also cause severe lung damage like cysts (fluid-filled sacs) and fibrosis (scar tissue). That’s how CF got its name. More than 30,000 people in the U.S. live with cystic fibrosis. Doctors diagnose about 1,000 new cases each year. People with CF can have symptoms including: Cystic fibrosis is caused by a change, or mutation, in a gene called CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator). This gene controls the flow of salt and fluids in and out of your cells. If the CFTR gene doesn’t work the way it should, a sticky mucus builds up in your body. To get CF, you have to inherit the mutated copy of the gene from both of your parents. Ninety percent of those with affected have at least one copy of the F508del mutation. If you inherit only one copy, you won’t have any symptoms, but you will be a carrier of the disease. That means there’s a chance you could pass it to your children. About 10 million Americans are CF carriers. Every time two CF carriers have a baby, there’s a 25% (1 in 4) chance that their baby will be born with CF. Early diagnosis means early treatment and better health later in life. Every state in the U.S. tests newborns for cystic fibrosis using one or more of these three tests: Some people who weren’t tested at birth aren’t diagnosed with CF until they become adults. Your doctor might give you DNA or sweat tests if you have symptoms of the disease. There’s no cure for cystic fibrosis, but medications and other therapies can ease symptoms. Medications.Your doctor may give you drugs to open your airways, thin mucus, prevent infections, and help your body get nutrients from food. These include: Airway clearance techniques.These can help get rid of mucus. You might try: Physical therapy for CF. This includes breathing exercises designed to push air between layers of mucus and your chest wall. They make it easier to cough up the gunk and ease blocked airways. Some common exercises include: The lungs aren’t the only part of your body CF damages. Cystic fibrosis also affects the following organs: Although CF is a severe condition that needs daily care, there are many ways to treat it, and there’s been a great improvement in those treatments over the years. People who have CF now can expect to live a much longer life than those who had it in the past. SOURCES: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: “Cystic Fibrosis.” NYU Langone Health: “Airway Clearance Techniques for Cystic Fibrosis in Children.” Lab Tests Online: “Cystic Fibrosis.” Stanford Children’s Health: “Diagnosis of Cystic Fibrosis.” Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Cystic fibrosis.” Nemours Foundation: “Cystic Fibrosis.” Cystic Fibrosis Foundation: “About Cystic Fibrosis,” “CF Genetics: The Basics,” “Active Cycle of Breathing Technique (ACBT),” “Newborn Screening for CF,” "Basics of Postural Drainage and Percussion." American Lung Foundation: “Learn about Cystic Fibrosis,” “Cystic Fibrosis,” “Fertility in Women with CF.” National Human Genome Research Institute: “Learning about Cystic Fibrosis.” Mayo Clinic: “Cystic Fibrosis.” YourGenome.org: “What is cystic fibrosis?” National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences/Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Cystic fibrosis.” The Childhood Liver Disease Research Network: “Cystic Fibrosis Liver Disease.” Johns Hopkins Cystic Fibrosis Center: “Effects of CF: Pancreas/Gastrointestinal Tract: Intestinal Problems,” “Effects of CF: Muscle/Bone,” “Effects of CF: Reproduction,” “Effects of CF: Bladder/Kidney.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.