You need tears for a lot more than crying. They flow across the surface of youreyesto clean and moisten them, then they leave youreyesthrough a system of tiny drainage tubes that run along your nose. Sometimes these tubes can get narrowed or blocked, which prevents the tears from draining out of youreyes. This extra fluid can leave youreyeswatery. If your eyes are watery and irritated, get them checked to find out whether it’s ablocked tear duct. If it is, your eye doctor has things they can do to open up the blockage and help your tears flow normally again. If the portion of the tear duct in the bone of the nose is blocked, it can cause a serious infection of the tear sac called dacryocystitis. Tear ducts are like tiny tunnels that your tears pass through. They’re part of the drainage system that goes from your eyes to your throat. Glands inside your eyelids and the white part of your eyes constantly release tears into your eyes. As you blink, they drain out. They exit through two small holes called puncta in the upper and lower inside corners of your eyelids, next to your nose. Sometimes babies are born with blocked tear ducts. This happens because a piece of tissue that covers the duct doesn't open up at birth like it should. It will usually open on its own within a few months. Less often, tear ducts get blocked because the tear drainage system didn't form correctly in the womb. In adults, tear ducts can get blocked for lots of reasons: There are different ways to open a blocked tear duct. They range from massage to procedures that remove the blockage. SOURCES: American Academy of Ophthalmology: "Blocked Tear Duct Causes;" "Blocked Tear Duct Diagnosis;" and "What is a Blocked Tear Duct?" American Rhinologic Society: "Dacryocystorhinostomy (DCR)" and "Epiphora (Excessive Tearing)." Kashkouli, M.Ophthalmic Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 2008. Pediatric Eye Disease Investigator Group.Archives of Ophthalmology, 2009. Seattle Children's Hospital: "Tear Duct, Blocked." UW Health: "Blocked Tear Ducts in Children" and "Frequently Asked Questions: Blocked Tear Duct and Silicone Intubation." Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.