Dermatitis herpetiformis(DH) is a bumpy,itchy skinrashthat’s common in people withceliac disease. That’s anautoimmune disorderthat keeps your body from digestinggluten, a protein found in wheat and other grains. DH, also knownas Duhring’s disease, causesblistersthat look likeherpes, but the condition doesn’t come from theherpesvirus. It’s linked to gluten sensitivity. If you haveceliac diseaseand eatgluten, yourintestinesmake an antibody called IgA in response. This chemical flows into your bloodstream and builds up inbloodvessels under yourskin. It triggers the DHrash. This condition is rare in children. It usually shows up for the first time when you’re between 30 and 40 years old. Men tend to get it more often than women.You’re more likely to have it if one of your parents or a brother or sister does too. It’s most common in people of European descent and rare in people of African or Asian heritage. The first thing you’ll probably notice is a burning or stinging sensation on certain places on your skin. After that, clusters of small, red bumps pop up. They’re very itchy, and can take several forms, like: Blisters Fluid-filled sores Sores that look likehives Raised sores You may mistake your bumps and blisters foreczema. Most often, DH shows up on your: Elbows Knees Scalp Butt Back ShoulderBlades You can also get them in other places on your body, like your neck, face, or groin. Usually, they show up on both sides of your body at once.It takes 1-2 weeks for your blisters to scab over and heal, but new blisters often grow in their place. The same response to gluten that’s affecting your skin may also damage your small intestine. That can cause digestive symptoms including: Abdominal bloating Cramps Diarrhea Constipation Sometimes, DH can even affect the enamel on yourteeth.Symptoms can die down and flare back up over time. Once you get DH, you usually deal with it for the rest of your life. Your doctor will need to do askin biopsy. After numbing the area, they’ll use a very small instrument that works like a cookie-cutter to “punch” out part of your skin. You may need a stitch or two to close up the site. It should heal quickly, with very little scarring. A lab will use dye to see if you have IgA in a certain type of pattern. This tells your doctor whether you haveDH. They  can then also take some of yourbloodto test it forceliac disease. There’s no cure for DH, butmedicationscan help heal your rash. Your doctor might prescribedapsone, which you take bymouth. It gets rid of youritchingand bumps within 1-3 days. Your doctor may also recommend a topical corticosteroid cream to help with itching. If tests show that you have celiac disease, your doctor will tell you to completely cut gluten out of your diet. Iodine, a common ingredient in salt, can make symptoms worse in some cases. So you may need to avoid that, too. A gluten-free diet is important, but it’s only part of the solution. In most cases, you’ll also need to take medicine to get full relief. SOURCES: Celiac Disease Foundation: “Dermatitis Herpetiformis.” National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases:“Dermatitis Herpetiformis: Skin Manifestation of Celiac Disease.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Dermatitis Herpetiformis.” American Osteopathic College of Dermatology: “Dermatitis Herpetiformis.” Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.