A hip fracture is a break in the top quarter of the thighbone, which is also called the femur. It can happen for lots of reasons and in many ways. Falls -- especially those to the side -- are among the most common causes. Some hipfracturesare more serious than others, but most are treated with surgery. Each year about 300,000 Americans -- most of them over age 65 -- break a hip. It happens to women more often than men. That’s because women fall more often and are more likely to haveosteoporosis, a disease that makes bones weak. Other things that increase your chances of a hip fracture include: Also, distance runners and ballet dancers sometimes develop thin cracks called stress fractures in their hips. They can grow bigger over time if they’re not treated. You’ll probably have a lot ofpain in your hipor groin. You may be unable to walk. Yourskinaround the injury may also swell, get red orbruise. Some people with hip fractures can still walk. They might just complain of vague pain in their hips, butt, thighs, groin or back. If your doctor thinks you’ve got a broken hip, they’ll ask questions about any recent injuries or falls. They’ll do aphysical examand take X-rays. If the X-ray image is unclear, you may also need anMRIorbone scan. To do a bone scan, your doctor injects a very small amount of radioactive dye into a vein in your arm. The ink travels through yourbloodinto your bones, where it can reveal fractures. It depends. They can damage surrounding muscles, ligaments, tendons,bloodvessels, and nerves. If they’re not treated right away, they could affect your ability to get around for long periods of time. When this happens, you run the risk of a number of complications, like: Usually, you’ll need surgery. The type depends on the kind of fracture you have, your age, and your overall health. But first, your doctor will likely order a number of tests, like blood and urine, chest X-rays, and anelectrocardiogram(EKG). The best way is to make sure your bones stay strong and healthy. To that end, your doctor might recommend one or more of the following: Your doctor may also recommend you take drugs that increase the activity of the hormoneestrogenand improve bone density. These are called selectiveestrogenreceptor modulators. The FDA has approved hip protector garments that can be worn by older people withosteoporosis. It’s thought they may help prevent hipfractures. SOURCES American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “OrthoInfo: Hip Fractures.” “Hip Fracture Prevention.” CDC: “Hip Fractures Among Older Adults.” New York University Langone Medical Center: “Types of Hip & Pelvic Fractures.” Houston Methodist Hospital: “Stress Fracture of the Hip.” Reduce bone loss and build stronger muscles. Calcium-rich foods to add to your diet. Get the facts on osteoporosis. Causes, symptoms, risk factors, and treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.