Folliculitis is a commonskin problemthat happens when you get bacteria or a blockage in a tiny pocket in your skin called a hair follicle. You have hair follicles just about everywhere except your lips, your palms, and the soles of your feet. Folliculitis can make these hair follicles red and swollen. You can get this condition anywhere you have hair, but it’s most likely to show up on your neck, thighs, buttocks, or armpits. You can often treat it yourself, but for more severe cases you may need to see your doctor. Different kinds of folliculitis have other names you might have heard, such as: Your symptoms will vary based on the exact type of folliculitis you have and how bad it is. You may have: These areas of your skin may be itchy, tender, and painful as well. There are two main types of folliculitis.Superficial folliculitisis when only part of the follicle is damaged, whiledeep folliculitisis when the whole follicle is damaged. It can be hard to tell which type of folliculitis you have. Other types include: Staph, a kind of bacteria, is most often to blame. You have staph on your skin all the time, and it normally doesn’t cause any issues. But if it gets inside your body, say through a cut, then it can cause problems. These other things can also cause folliculitis: In general, you’re more likely to get the condition if you have damaged follicles. This can happen from things such as shaving, skin injuries, sticky bandages, and tight clothes. You also might be more likely to have folliculitis if you: Your doctor can usually tell if you have it by looking at your skin closely and asking questions about your medical history. You don’t usually need tests unless treatments don’t work. In that case, your doctor may use a swab to take a skin sample and find out exactly what’s causing the problem. Mild folliculitis might go away without any treatment. To help yourself heal and ease symptoms, you can: Clean the infected area:Wash twice a day with warm water and antibacterial soap. Be sure to use a fresh cloth and towel each time. Use salt:Put warm saltwater -- 1 teaspoon table salt mixed with 2 cups of water -- on a washcloth and place it on your skin. You can also try white vinegar. Gels, creams, and washes:Use over-the-counter antibiotics that you rub on your skin. If you’re itchy, you can try oatmeal lotion orhydrocortisonecream. It also helps to avoid shaving, scratching, and wearing tight or rough clothes on the infected area. If these self-care treatments don’t work, your doctor may give you: To lower your chances of getting folliculitis, your best bet is to stop shaving for at least 3 months, but for a lot of people that won’t do. You might want to try an electric razor or hair removal products (depilatories) or other ways to remove hair. If those don’t work for you, then be sure to: It can help to shave only every other day. You also should not wear clothes that irritate your skin or trap heat and sweat, such as Lycra, rubber gloves, and high boots. Limit your use of oils and other greasy skin products. They can cause blockages and trap bacteria. Other things you can do: Photo Credit: BSIP / Science Source SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Folliculitis.” Medscape: “Hair Anatomy.” DermNet New Zealand: “Folliculitis.” Indiana University Bloomington Health Center: “Folliculitis.” The International Foundation for Dermatology: “Management of Bacterial Infections of the Hair Follicles.” Primary Care Dermatology Society: “Folliculitis and boils (furuncles/carbuncles).” American Osteopathic College of Dermatology: “Folliculitis.” Mayo Clinic – Photo Caption. American Academy of Dermatology  Association – Photo Caption. American Osteopathic College of Dermatology – Photo Caption. Pictures and symptoms of the red, scaly rash. What you should know. 8 diseases you can catch from ticks. What causes them, and what you can do about them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.