If you look at an adult foot from the inside, you'll usually notice an upward curve in the middle. This is called an arch. Tendons -- tight bands that attach at the heel and foot bones -- form the arch. Several tendons in your foot and lower leg work together to form the arches in your foot. When the tendons all pull the proper amount, then your foot forms a moderate, normal arch. When tendons do not pull together properly, there is little or no arch. This is called flat foot or fallen arch. You can easily test yourself to see if you might have fallen arches or flat feet. Follow these three steps: Many young children have flat feet, a condition referred to as flexible flat feet. When the child stands, the feet look flat. But when the child rises to their toes, a slight arch appears. In most cases, as children grow older, the arches develop. Flat feet in adults can arise from a variety of causes. Here are the most common: Other factors that can increase your risk include: Many people have flat feet -- and notice no problems and require no treatment. But you may experience the following symptoms: If you notice any of these symptoms, it's time for a trip to the doctor. Your doctor examines your feet to determine two things: An exam may include these steps: Treatment for flat feet and fallen arches depends on the severity and cause of the problem. If flat feet cause no pain or other difficulties, then treatment is probably not needed. In other cases, your doctor may suggest one or more of these treatments: If pain or foot damage is severe, your doctor may recommend surgery. Procedures include the following: There are home remedies to prevent or manage pain from fallen arches or flat feet. Here are some areas to consider: Psoriatic arthritis (PsA)is a mix of a skin disorder (psoriasis) and joint inflammation (arthritis). It's a long-term condition that can run in families. PsA may cause stiffness and throbbing pain in the tendons over your fingers, toes, and other joints. To treat it: Plantar fasciitisis the most common cause of arch pain.Plantar fasciitiscan affect the heel, arch, or both. Treatment is the same regardless of the location. For persistent plantar fasciitis, an injection with a mixture of a steroid and local anesthetic can be helpful. SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: "Adult (Acquired) Flatfoot," "Flexible Flatfoot in Children," "Posterior Tibial Tendon Dysfunction," "Rheumatoid Arthritis of the Foot and Ankle." eMedicine: "Acquired Flatfoot." Snyder, K.Medscape/Applied Radiology Online: "Flat Feet." Canale, S.Campbell's Operative Orthopedics, Mosby, 2008. Goldman, L.Cecil Medicine, Saunders Elsevier, 2008. MedlinePlus: “Psoriatic arthritis.” Arthritis Foundation: “Psoriatic Arthritis.” American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons: “Osteoarthritis of the Foot and Ankle.”  Photo credit: WebMD Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.