On a good day, yourbreastscan feel tender. They're always out on the front lines, taking the brunt of every afternoon jog and pouncingtoddler. They don't get infected often, but when they do, it can hurt like no bad bra orPMSpain ever has. The catchall name for an infection of thebreasttissue ismastitis. If you'rebreastfeeding, it's called lactation or puerperal mastitis. If you're not, it's called periductal mastitis. Mastitis can make you feel like you havethe flu, but it can be cured a lot quicker. Mastitis is a common condition in women whobreastfeed. As many as 1 in 10breastfeedingwomen in the U.S. get it. It's caused by a backup of milk in the milk ducts. This happens when yourbabyisn't sucking or attaching properly, or favors one breast over the other. Mastitis can also happen if you don't feed or pump regularly. Breastfeeding women aren't the only ones who get mastitis. If you're not breastfeeding, a cracked nipple or nipple piercing can cause the breast infection. Both allow bacteria to get into the milk ducts. This is especially common in women who smoke. Just like any other infection, the tissue around the infected area becomes inflamed to keep it from spreading to other parts of the body. With mastitis, the infected milk duct causes the breast to swell. Your breast may look red and feel tender or warm. Many women with mastitis feel like they havethe flu, including achiness, chills, and afeverof 101 F or higher. You may also have discharge from your nipple or feel a hard lump in your breast. The symptoms of mastitis can come on very suddenly. You may feel like you're gettingthe flubefore you feel any discomfort in your breast. When you feel thatpainor see the telltale redness, call your doctor as soon as possible. Your doctor can diagnose mastitis based on aphysical exam. The fever and chills give it away, as does a red, wedge-shaped area on the breast that points toward the nipple. There are two things to rule out: a breast abscess, which happens when mastitis isn't treated quickly, andinflammatory breast cancer, which is rare and shares the symptoms of redness and swelling. Whether or not you're breastfeeding,antibioticsshould have you feeling better in a day or two. Take them as directed. If you are breastfeeding, continue drinking lots of water, wearing loose bras, and resting as much as you can. Your doctor may suggest ibuprofen, or something like it, to take care of the fever and pain. It's important to keep breastfeeding and move that milk in and out of the ducts. Continue expressing milk if it is too painful to feed from the breast. Tight bras and clothing put pressure on your breasts. Keep things light and loose. To keep milk from backing up, make sure yourbabyattaches correctly, and get all the milk out of each breast during every feeding. Alactation consultantcan help if you need support. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: "Mastitis." Cleveland Clinic: "Mastitis." American Academy of Family Physicians: "Management of Mastitis in Breastfeeding Women." National Health Service UK: "Mastitis."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.