From head to toe, yourblooddelivers oxygen to every part of your body. Your cells need it to survive. If yourbloodflow gets blocked anywhere, it can bring big trouble. One serious effect is a problem called atransient ischemic attack, or TIA for short. When you have a TIA, the flow of blood to part of yourbraingets cut off for a short time. It's also called a ministroke, but don't let the "mini" part fool you. A TIA can be a sign that a full-blownstrokeis on the way. About 1 in 3 people who have a TIA go on to have astroke, often within a year. TIAs are short and won't cause lasting damage, but it's still important to treat them like an emergency and get care right away. TIAs typically happen because ablood clotgets lodged in anarterythat supplies blood to thebrain. Without regular blood flow, yourbrainis starved for oxygen and can't work like it normally does. That's why you get symptoms like muscle weakness or slurred speech. It would be like having a clogged fuel line in your car. Your engine can't run if it's not getting gas. Clots form when you have a buildup of a fatty, waxy substance called plaque in your arteries. They can take shape anywhere in your body and float along until they get stuck somewhere. If that "somewhere" happens to be an artery that goes to yourbrain, you can have a TIA. You can also get a TIA if so much plaque builds up in an artery that it severely limits blood flow to the brain, just like a clot. TIAs are very similar to ischemic strokes, which are also caused byblood clots. The main difference is that a TIA only lasts a few minutes. The clot then gets pushed along, like a temporary clog in a pipe, or chemicals in your body quickly break it down. Normal blood flow returns to your brain before any lasting problems set in. Symptoms can last for up to 24 hours, but they're usually gone in an hour. Strokes, on the other hand, don't go away so quickly. That means some part of your brain goes without oxygen, and the longer that lasts, the more damage happens. While a TIA comes on, goes away, and leaves no symptoms, astrokecan have long-lasting effects and can be life-threatening. The same things that raise your odds of a stroke also affect your risk of a TIA, and there are a lot of issues in play. Risks you can't control.Some things you can't change, but it's helpful to be aware of them: Health conditions.Other medical problems you have can also increase the odds of a TIA, including: Lifestyle.Some of the choices you make every day may also affect your chances of having a TIA. You may have a higher risk if you: Risks for women.Odds of a TIA may be higher for women who: SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: "Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)." American Heart Association/American Stroke Association: "Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)," "Stroke Risks." NHS: "Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)." Cleveland Clinic: "Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA)." National Stroke Association: "What Is TIA?" "Women and Stroke." Know these 5 signs. Things you can do to reduce your chances of having one. Is there a link? Get the facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.