As the name suggests, these aremigrainesthat happen in cycles. They’re sometimes called cluster migraines, but that’s not correct. They’re not the same ascluster headaches, which are short, intense, and happen daily. They also differ from regular migraines in how long they last and how they’re treated. They may happen every day or several times a week for 1 to 6 weeks, with low-grade headpainin between. On average, people who get them have about 10 attacks a month. They can last anywhere from a few hours up to 2 days during this “on” cycle. The average attack lasts about 6 hours. It’s followed by an “off” cycle that can last for weeks or months. You may feel them on one side or both sides of your head. If it starts on one side, it may move to the other side as the attack happens. Before it starts, you may see auras or notice that yourvisionisn’t right -- kind of like a blind spot. Other signs (called premonitory signs) that one is coming on include: Depressionmay go along with them. It can start before or during an attack. Like the regular kind, cyclic migraines may causenausea, vomiting, or sensitivity to light and sound. Thistype of headachetends to begin by the time you’re 20 years old. Most of the people who have them are female. More than half have afamily historyofmigraines. There is no single test that can diagnose this condition. Your doctor will start with a review of your medical history. They’ll also try to rule out other causes with: Your doctor will go through yourmigrainehistory in detail. They’ll ask how often they happen, how much pain they cause, what symptoms come with them, and how much they affect your daily life. The exact cause isn’t completely understood. But these two things may play a role: Changes in how your brain interacts with a nerve in your head called the trigeminal nerve may be an important part of it. Imbalances in brain chemicals may also play a part. Serotonin levels drop during a migraine attack. This chemical helps tomanage painin yournervous system. The treatment for cyclic migraines differs from that for the regular kind. For those, your doctor may suggest a nonprescription non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID), such asacetaminophen,aspirin, oribuprofen. They may also advisecaffeine. The most effective treatment for the cyclic type is lithium carbonate. This is alithiumsalt that comes as a tablet. It calms the central nervous system to act as a mood stabilizer. You need a prescription to get it. The most common side effects of lithium carbonate are: Your doctor also may prescribe indomethacin. This is an NSAID used to relieve pain. Most people can take this drug without side effects. But some may have an upset stomach,heartburn,indigestion, or nausea. If you havekidneyorheart disease, talk with your doctor before you take this kind of drug. A migraine journal can help you manage your attacks. Write down when you have them and how long they last. Include any symptoms you had before it started. Keep track of the pain level and what makes it feel better. Also, make notes on what doesn’t work. When you see your doctor, you’ll have the answers to their questions in your journal. You won’t have to rely on your memory. Detailed answers will help them identify and diagnose your condition. Your journal may help you pinpoint your triggers -- the things that cause your migraines to start -- and avoid them. The most common ones include: SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Headaches: Less Frequent Types.” National Headache Foundation: “Cyclic Migraine Syndrome.” Neurology: “Premonitory Symptoms in Migraine.” JAMA Neurology: “Cyclical Migraine Headache-Reply.” The Migraine Trust: “Diagnosis.” Mayo Clinic: “Migraine,” “Indomethacin (Oral Route).” American Family Physician: “Treatment of Acute Migraine Headache.” National Center for Biotechnology Information: “Lithium carbonate.” National Alliance on Mental Illness: “Lithium.” American Migraine Foundation: “Top 10 Migraine Triggers and How to Deal with Them.” What aura looks like, triggers, and more. Get the truth about migraine. Could pot ease your pain? Test your knowledge of triggers, types, and more. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.