 Gilbert’s syndrome(also called constitutional hepatic dysfunction or familial nonhemolytic jaundice) is a common disorder that's passed through families. When you have it, too much of a waste product called bilirubin builds up in yourblood. It can make yourskinandeyeslook yellow from time to time. Gilbert’s syndrome looks scarier than it is. It's a harmless condition that doesn't need to be treated. It happens when a gene called UGT1A1 changes, or mutates. This gene carries instructions for making aliverenzyme that helps break down and get rid of the bilirubin in your body. Parents pass UGT1A1 gene mutations to their children. You need two copies of the mutated gene -- one from each parent -- to get it. Even if you do have both genes, you might not have Gilbert’s syndrome. Gilbert’s syndrome is more common in men than in women. Most people with Gilbert’s syndrome don't have symptoms. They have enough of theliverenzyme to control their bilirubin levels. When bilirubin does build up in theblood, it causes the skin and whites of theeyesto turn yellow. This is calledjaundice. See your doctor if you notice a yellow color to your skin andeyesbecause another condition could be causing it. Jaundice can cause other symptoms such as: Jaundice is a common problem in babies. But it’s worse in babies born with Gilbert’s syndrome. Certain things can make your bilirubin levels rise, but you might only notice jaundice when you: Although people are born with Gilbert’s syndrome, sometimes they don’t get diagnosed until their 20s or 30s. You may have a blood test for another reason and your doctor may notice you have high bilirubin levels, which may be a clue that you have the syndrome.They may do more tests to diagnose you, including: Most people with Gilbert’s syndrome don't need treatment. Jaundice doesn't cause any long-term problems. To prevent it, try to avoid things that make your bilirubin levels rise. For instance: The same liver enzyme that breaks down bilirubin also breaks down certain medicines, including: If you have Gilbert’s syndrome and you take any of these drugs, you're at higher risk for side effects likediarrhea. Ask your doctor before you take any new medicine. And don't take more than the recommended dose. SOURCES: American Liver Foundation: "Gilbert Syndrome." BMJ Best Practice: "Gilbert's syndrome." British Liver Trust: "Gilbert's Syndrome." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Gilbert Syndrome." Orphanet: "Gilbert syndrome." UpToDate: "Patient education: Gilbert syndrome (Beyond the Basics)." National Library of Medicine: “Gilbert’s Syndrome, Treatment and Management.” National Health Service: “Gilbert’s Syndrome, Symptoms of Gilbert’s Syndrome.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.