Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome is a rare disorder that happens whenpelvic inflammatory disease(PID) causes swelling of the tissue around theliver. You may also hear it called “gonococcal perihepatitis” or “perihepatitis syndrome.” Pelvic inflammatory disease is an infection of a woman’s reproductive organs. Most often it’s caused by sexually transmitted infections (STIs) likechlamydiaandgonorrhea. It usually causesinflammationof the uterus,ovaries, fallopian tubes,cervix, orvagina. Sometimes, thisinflammationspreads to the covering of theliveror the tissues surrounding theliverin theabdomen. It can also spread to the diaphragm, the muscle that separates the abdominal cavity and the chest. Most cases of Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome are linked to chlamydia or gonorrhea infections. But doctors don’t know exactly what causes these to spur Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome. Some cases may start when an infection spreads to the liver. Other evidence suggests that it could be anautoimmune disease, which is when your body’s natural defenses attack your own healthy tissues. Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome is marked by sudden, severe pain in the upper right area of your belly, just below the ribs. You might also feel pain on your rightshoulderand right arm. Moving usually makes it worse. Other symptoms might include: The symptoms of PID -- pain in the lower belly andvaginal discharge-- are often present, as well. Women of childbearing age who have PID have the biggest chance of developing Fitz-Hugh-Curtis syndrome.Teensare high-risk, too, because they’re more prone to infections. In very rare cases, men can get it. If your doctor is sure you have PID, they’ll run tests to rule out any other conditions and diseases that can cause similar symptoms, like viralhepatitis,pancreatitis,appendicitis, andpeptic ulcer disease. These tests might include anultrasound, chest orstomachX-rays, and CT scans. Your doctor may also perform alaparoscopy. They’ll insert a thin tube into your abdomen to view your liver and surrounding tissue. Normally, you would take an antibiotic in pill form or have it injected through an IV. Your doctor might also prescribe pain medicine. If treating the underlying STI doesn’t ease yourabdominal pain, your doctor may perform a laparoscopy to remove scar tissue around your liver. During the procedure, they’ll insert a small, thin tool through a small cut made in your belly and cut away the dead tissue (“adhesions”). This is rarely done. Since this condition is linked to PID, the best way to prevent it is to not get PID. To reduce your risk, you can: SOURCES: National Organization for Rare Diseases: “Fitz Hugh Curtis Syndrome.” National Institutes of Health Genetic and Rare Diseases Information Center: “Fitz-Hugh-Curtis Syndrome.” CDC: “Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.” PubMed: “Fitz-Hugh-Curtis Syndrome: A Diagnosis to Consider in Women With Right Upper Quadrant Pain.” Mayo Clinic: “Pelvic Inflammatory Disease Prevention.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.