 Prediabetesis when yourblood sugarlevel is higher than it should be but not high enough for your doctor to diagnosediabetes. They might call it impaired fasting glucose or impaired glucose tolerance. People with type 2 diabetes almost always had prediabetes first. But it doesn’t usually cause symptoms. About 84 million people over age 20 in the U.S. have prediabetes, but 90% don’t know that they have it. Prediabetes treatment can prevent more serious health problems, includingtype 2 diabetesand problems with yourheart, blood vessels,eyes, andkidneys. If you have symptoms, you might notice that: You’re more likely to get prediabetes if you: Get tested for prediabetes if those things apply to you and if you: Your doctor will do at least one of these tests: Fasting plasma glucose test.You won’t eat for 8 hours, and then a technician will take your blood to test the sugar levels. The results are: Oral glucose tolerance test.First, you'll have a fasting plasma glucose test. Then, you'll drink something sugary. Two hours after that, a technician will take and test more blood. The results are: Hemoglobin A1c test.This blood test shows your average blood sugar levels for the past 2 to 3 months. Doctors give it to people who have diabetes to see if their blood sugar levels are under control. They can also use it to diagnose prediabetes or diabetes. The results are: You may need to take the test again to confirm the results. Doctors diagnose prediabetes based on the same blood sugar levels, no matter the person’s age. The American Diabetes Association says children 10 and older should be tested if they’re overweight or obese and have: If a child who has a high chance of getting prediabetes has normal test results, the American Diabetes Association advises testing them again at least every 3 years. Without treatment, prediabetes can become type 2 diabetes or cause other serious problems including: Take these steps to treat prediabetes: There’s no official diet, but four swaps can reverse prediabetes and lower your chances of gettingtype 2 diabetes: Exercising and eating foods low in carbohydrates, sugars, fats, and salt can also helpprevent prediabetes. Other tips include: SOURCES: American Diabetes Association: "Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes -- 2012," “Pre-Diabetes,” “How to Tell if You Have Pre-Diabetes,” "Diabetes Basics," “Diagnosing Diabetes and Learning About Prediabetes,” “Diagnosis.” National Diabetes Clearinghouse: “Insulin Resistance and Pre-Diabetes.” Shoelson, S.Journal of Clinical Investigation,2006. Phillips, L.Diabetes Care,2006. Kim, S.Journal of the American College of Cardiology,2006. Mayo Clinic: “Prediabetes.” Harvard School of Public Health: “Simple Steps to Preventing Diabetes.” CDC: “Prediabetes: Your Chance to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes.” Diabetes Care: “Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes – 2019.” StatPearls: “Prediabetes.” Merck Manual Consumer Version: “Diabetes Mellitus (DM).” American Academy of Family Physicians: “Prediabetes.” Children’s Hospital Los Angeles: “Insulin Resistance: Dealing With the Diagnosis.” See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.