Meniere’s disease is an inner-ear condition that can causevertigo, a specific type ofdizzinessin which you feel as though you’re spinning. It also can cause ringing in your ear (tinnitus),hearing lossthat comes and goes, and a feeling of fullness or pressure in your ear. Usually, only one ear is affected. Thehearing losseventually can be permanent. The disorder takes its name from a French doctor, Prosper Meniere, who suggested in the 1860s that the symptoms came from the inner ear and not thebrain, as most people believed. The cause of Meniere’s disease isn’t known, but doctors think they understand how the symptoms of Meniere’s happen. Fluid builds up inside a part of your inner ear called the labyrinth, which holds structures that help with hearing and balance. The extra fluid interferes with the signals yourbrainreceives, causing vertigo and hearing problems. Why people get Meniere’s isn’t clear. Researchers have several theories about what might affect the fluid in the inner ear, though: It’s possible that a combination of issues come together to cause Meniere’s. Meniere’s is a progressive disease, which means it gets worse over time. It may start slowly with occasionalhearing loss. Vertigo may develop later. If you’re dizzy, sit or lie down right away. Don’t do any type of movement that might make your vertigo worse. Don’t try to drive. Along with the main symptoms, some people may have: Attacks can last 20 minutes or as long as 24 hours. You might get several in a week, or they might come months or even years apart. Afterward, you may feel tired and need to rest. As your Meniere’s progresses, your symptoms may change. Your hearing loss and tinnitus may become constant. You might have problems with balance andvisioninstead of having occasional bouts of vertigo. If you think you might have Meniere’s disease, call your doctor. Don’t assume it will get better on its own. You and your doctor will talk about your symptoms and medical history. A series of diagnostic tests can check your balance and hearing. These might include: Additional imaging tests.Your doctor also might recommend anMRIorCT scanto rule out the possibility that something other than Meniere’s is causing your symptoms. A hearing aid may help, and some treatments can ease both your vertigo and the fluid buildup in your ear.Read more abouthearing aids and vertigo. Oral Medications Medicationfor motion sickness might help with your vertigo, and medicine for nausea might help with vomiting if that’s a side effect of your dizziness. Other drug treatments include: Other Therapies In addition to medication, you might try therapy targeted to help with balance issues. Injections These go straight into your ear and may ease your vertigo. Your doctors might choose an antibiotic calledgentamicin(Garamycin, Gentak), which is toxic to your inner ear. It reduces the function of the affected ear so that your “good” ear takes over your balance. This procedure is done in a doctor’s office, where you’ll be given something to numb the pain before the injection. Or your doctor might choose to inject a steroid. Surgery A few patients won’t respond to any of these treatments and will need surgery. Those procedures  include: It’s not clear you can do anything to prevent Meniere’s disease, but you can do a few things to help manage your symptoms. If  you’re having an attack of vertigo: Try to sit down and stay still. Don’t make sudden movements, and avoid bright light, loud noise, and other triggers. Watching TV or even reading also can be harmful. Fix your gaze on something steady. In addition to eating a low-salt diet, you may want to cut down on alcohol andcaffeine. Some people think such diet changes lessen the effects of the disease. Tobacco use also can be harmful, as cigarettes have chemicals in them that restrict blood vessels. If this happens in your ears, it can lead to hearing loss. Studies show that smokers are much more likely to have hearing loss than nonsmokers. Vertigo attacks can be triggered by different things in different people. Try to write down as many things as you can remember about the episode. Triggers might include: Stress Overwork Fatigue Sharp changes in weather, specifically air pressure Underlying illness SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions – Ménière’s Disease.” Vestibular Disorders Association: “Ménière’s Disease,”“Diagnosis,” “What Is Vestibular Rehabilitation?” National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders: “Ménière’s Disease.” National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases: “Understanding Autoimmune Diseases.” American Academy of Otolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery: “Ménière’s Disease.” University of California San Diego Health System: “Ménière’s Disease.” Meniere’s.org: “Meniere’s Disease Triggers.” Academy of Neurologic Physical Therapy: “What Is Meniere’s Disease.” Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.