You might not be familiar with the name, but you probably know the taste.Capsaicinis the stuff in chilipeppersthat makes yourmouthfeel hot. But it's also got a medical purpose. It's a key ingredient in creams and patches that can give you relief frompain. When you put capsaicin on yourskin, you help block pain messages to your nerves. Studies show capsaicin creams and patches can help relieve pain that's due to: Some research suggests it may help improve scaling,inflammation, redness, and pain frompsoriasis. It may also help relieve pain fromnerve damagethat's due to:  Capsaicin comes in two main forms: Capsaicin cream.For mosttypes of painrelief, your doctor may suggest you try capsaicin cream, lotion, ointment, gel, stick, film, or ointment. You usually don't need a prescription. To treatheadaches, you'll dab a bit inside your nostrils. Otherwise you'll rub it thoroughly onto your skin in the area where you hurt, several times a day.Wash your handsbefore and after you use it, and keep it away from youreyesandmouth. Capsaicin patches.They have higher levels of capsaicin than creams. Your doctor may suggest it for postherpetic neuralgia or other long-term conditions likediabetic neuropathy. You can only get the capsaicin patch at a doctor's office. They'll numb the area before applying it. Expect the process to take around 2 hours. The capsaicin patch may help relieve pain for up to 3 months. Avoid touching the patch while it's on your skin. Both creams and patches can irritate your skin and cause problems like: This sometimes gets worse in hot and humid weather, when you bathe in warmwater, and when you sweat. It usually lasts for just a few days but can continue for 2 to 4 weeks. Capsaicin can also make your skin more sensitive to the sun and heat, so usesunscreenevery time you head outdoors. Like any drug, it can cause anallergic reactionin some people. Call you doctor if you get itching,hives, swelling in your throat, chest tightness, andtrouble breathing The patch can also cause rare side effects that affect yourheart, including a slow or fastheart rateand a change inblood pressure. Let your doctor know if you have a history ofheartorbloodvessel problems orhigh blood pressure. SOURCES: Arthritis Foundation: "Supplement Guide: Capsaicin." Berger, A.Journal of Pain Systems Management, May 1996. Derry S.Cochrane, published online Jan. 13, 2017. British Journal of Anaesthesia: "Repeated intranasal capsaicin applications to treat chronic migraine," "Topical capsaicin for pain management: therapeutic potential and mechanisms of action of the new high-concentration 8% patch." Mayo Clinic: "Capsaicin: Topical Route," "Shingles," "Postherpetic Neuralgia" National Health Service: "Capsaicin patch (Qutenza) for peripheral diabetic neuropathy." National Psoriasis Foundation: "Herbs/Natural Remedies." PubMed Health: "Capsaicin (On the Skin)." Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.