Cholecystitisis a swelling and irritation of yourgallbladder, a small organ in the right side of your belly near yourliver. The gallbladder’s job is to hold a digestive juice called bile. It releases bile into your small intestine when your body needs it to break down fats. But if the path to your small intestine is blocked, bile gets trapped. That backup can irritate your gallbladder. That’s how cholecystitis happens. Nausea and vomitingare common symptoms. They often show up after you’ve eaten a big or especially fatty meal. It’s easy to mistake cholecystitis for other health problems, but another telltale sign is intensepain-- in your belly, in your back, or under your rightshoulderblade. If you don’t see a doctor and get treatment, it can lead to dangerous infections or become a long-term condition. The most common solution is surgery to remove your gallbladder. Cholecystitis can mimic other health problems, so you’ll need to see a doctor for a diagnosis. You might feel a sharp, sudden pain in the upper right side of your belly. You may also feel pain in your back or below your right shoulder blade. Deep breaths may make it worse. Some other symptoms to watch out for include: Symptoms may get worse after a high-fatmeal. If you can’t get comfortable or sit still because your pain is so strong, head to an emergency room. The usual reason bile backs up is thatgallstones-- lumps of bile turned solid -- block the way to the small intestine. Gallstones are common. About 10% to 20% of Americans have them. About half of people with gallstones will get cholecystitis. But gallstones aren’t the only problem that can cause this condition. Others include: Cholecystitis can come on suddenly. You may hear a doctor or nurse call it an “acute” case. Or it can be a long-term problem. Those cases are called “chronic.” You have a higher chance of getting cholecystitis if you: Or if you have: You also run a bigger chance of getting it if yourdietis high in fat andcholesterolor your ancestry is Native American, Hispanic, or Scandinavian. The doctor will examine you, ask a few questions about your symptoms, and probably order some tests. You should be ready to: Your doctor can tell from blood tests whether you have an infection and whether your liver is working the way it should. They may also want you to have someimaging tests. These may include:  If you have cholecystitis, especially an acute case, you may have to spend some time in the hospital. You will have to keep yourstomachempty so your gallbladder can rest. You’ll probably get fluids through a tube put into a vein. You may get pain medicine and, if doctors are concerned about infection, an antibiotic. Once treatment begins, you should start to feel better. If gallstones caused your problem, doctors may trymedicationsto dissolve them and give you a prescription drug to keep them from forming again. A very low-fat diet may also keep them from coming back. By far the most common treatment is to take out the gallbladder. Your doctor may decide to do the surgery right away, unless you’re too sick. If you need to wait, doctors can ease symptoms by putting a tube through your skin straight into the gallbladder and draining some bile. Surgery to remove your gallbladder, called a cholecystectomy, usually takes about an hour and is considered low-risk. You’ll getgeneral anesthesia, so you won’t be awake or feel any pain during the procedure. The doctor will make a small cut in your bellybutton to take a look inside with a special instrument. They’ll then take out the gallbladder through another small cut. You can live a healthy life without your gallbladder. You can take steps to lower your chances of getting gallstone and cholecystitis. They include: Obesityis a major risk factor for getting gallstones. Losing weight can reduce your chances, but be sure you do it in a healthy way. If you’re planning a rapidweight loss program, such asweight loss surgery, your doctor or nurse should monitor you. They may recommend bile acid pills to prevent gallstones as you lose weight. If you don’t get treatment, your gallbladder can become infected, and some of the tissue may die. Infection can also spread to other parts of your body, including yourpancreas(pancreatitis) and the lining of your belly (peritonitis). If the tubes that carry bile are damaged too much, cholecystitis can harm your liver, too. You could have repeated bouts of painful symptoms. Eventually, your gallbladder will shrink and not work as well. The condition would become a long-term, or chronic, problem. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions – Cholecystitis.” Cleveland Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions – Cholecystitis,” “Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy (Gallbladder Removal).” Johns Hopkins Medicine Health Library: “Cholecystitis.” Medscape: “Gallstones (Cholelithiasis).” Scientific Reports:“The relation between gallstone disease and cardiovascular disease.” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.