Your shoulders do a lot of important things you might take for granted. They help you get something off a high shelf, comb your hair, or play a game of tennis or catch. It’s a complicated process that your body makes look easy. And yourrotator cuffis a big part of that. It protects yourshoulderjointand lets you move your arms over your head. It’s especially important in sports like baseball,swimming, or tennis. © 2014 WebMD, LLC. All rights reserved.  Your rotator cuff is made up of muscles and tendons that keep the ball (head) of your upper-arm bone (humerus) in your shoulder socket. It also helps you raise and rotate your arm. Each one of these muscles is part of the rotator cuff and plays an important role: Arotator cuff tearis often the result of wear and tear from daily use. Most tears are partial. You’re more likely to have this if you have a job where you need to move your arm a certain way over and over, like a painter or a carpenter, or you play sports like tennis and baseball. It also can happen suddenly if you fall on your arm or try to lift something heavy. It’s usually treated with physical therapy andmedication, or you may need surgery. Rotator cuff tendinopathy. Formerly calledtendinitis,thisisinflammationor irritation of a tendon that attaches to a bone. It causes pain in the area just outside the joint. Common types of tendinitis include pitcher’s and swimmer’s shoulder. Bursitisis when the bursa (a small sac filled with fluid that protects your rotator cuff) gets irritated. That can happen when you repeat the same motion over and over again, like throwing a baseball or lifting something over your head. It also can be caused by an infection. Tendinitis and bursitis can get better with rest, a combination of ice and heat, and over-the-counter pain relievers likeaspirin,ibuprofen, andnaproxen. Tendinitis and bursitis usually get better over time. Treatments include: Call your doctor if the pain lasts more than a few weeks or keeps you from doing daily activities. It is usually treated with a steroid injection and physical therapy. SOURCES: Comparative Effectiveness Reviews: “Comparative Effectiveness of Nonoperative and Operative Treatments for Rotator Cuff Tears.” Sports Injury Clinic: “Suprasinitus.” “Infraspinatus,” “Teres Minor.” University of Washington Department of Radiology: “Subscapularis.” Mayo Clinic: “Bursitis,” “Rotator Cuff Injuries.” Cleveland Clinic: “Shoulder Tendinitis.” Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.