Kava Kava is an herbal remedy that's made from the roots ofPiper methysticum-- a type of plant found in the islands of the Pacific Ocean. Its name literally means “intoxicating pepper.” People who live on Pacific islands like Fiji and Tonga have used it for hundreds of years in social gatherings and traditional medicine. They dry out the roots or crush them into a powder. Then they addwaterand drink the mixture. Kavakava (“kava” for short) contains substances called kavapyrones. They act much likealcoholon yourbrain, making you feel calm, relaxed, and happy. The plant is also thought to relievepain, preventseizures, and relax muscles. You can buy it as an herbal supplement online and in health food stores. It's available in capsules, tablets, or tinctures (that means it’s dissolved inalcohol). Kava has been used to treat a number of conditions, including: Doctors aren’t sure how much kava you can take safely. If your doctor gives you the okay, use the smallest possible dose. Don't take it for longer than 3 months, and avoid drinking alcohol while you’re using it. Kava can have side effects. The most common are: The most serious concern stems from reports ofliverdamage in a few people who took kava. In 2002, the FDA released a consumer advisory that warned about the risk ofliverdisease with thesupplements. The herb was linked tocirrhosis(liverscarring),hepatitis(irritation of the liver), andliver failure(this led to aliver transplantor death in a few patients). It's not clear whether kava caused the liver damage, or if othermedicationsor herbs the people took caused it. Most of the time, the damage improved within a few months after they stopped taking the kava. A few countries, including France and Canada, have banned kava because of the risk it poses to the liver. But you can still buy it in the U.S. and online. It might also be addictive, but this hasn't been proven. Talk to your doctor if you’re thinking about taking kava. Tell them about all the medicines you take. This herb can interact with some medications, including: Don't use kava if you have liver disease, arepregnantorbreastfeeding, or havedepressionorbipolar disorder. Make an appointment if you take kava and have any of the following signs of liver damage: SOURCES: U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Kava Kava (Piper Methysticum).” Annali dell'Istituto Superiore di Sanita: “Psychoactive Natural Products: Overview of Recent Developments.” Aronson, J.K.: “Meyler’s Side Effects of Herbal Medicines.” University of Rochester Medical Center: “Kava Kava.” FDA: “Consumer Advisory: Kava-Containing Dietary Supplements May Be Associated with Severe Liver Injury.” Do you know your vitamin ABCs? Ease hot flashes and other symptoms. Are you getting enough? Wonder pill or overkill? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.