Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease affects the nerves outside the spinal cord andbrain. People with the condition can have problems with their feet and trouble balancing. Three doctors -- Jean-Martin Charcot, Pierre Marie and Howard Henry Tooth – identified a nerve disease back in 1886. Today, a whole group of genetic disorders is named after that trio. Other names it is known by are hereditary motor and sensoryneuropathyandperoneal muscular atrophy. Researchers have found 90 genetic types of CMT disease. It affects roughly 1 in every 2,500 Americans. You can get a number of treatments, includingphysical therapy, braces and other orthopedic devices, and surgery. It isn't contagious. It’s passed down from parents to children in their DNA. The disease has no known cure, but scientists have identified many genes that cause the disorder. Genetic mutations in CMT affect the way that nerve cells “talk” with each other. Over time, they’re unable to work properly and start to fall apart. This can make you become weak and possibly less able to feel sensations such as ablisteron your toe. The symptoms of CMT disease generally start before you’re out of yourteens. One that shows up a lot is a high arch, which happens as some foot muscles weaken while others remain strong. Another possible problem:hammertoes, in which the second, third or fourth toes bend in the middle. These can start making it hard to walk, and you tend to getblistersandcalluses. As walking gets harder, you may have a hard time lifting your feet (called “foot drop”). You may form a “slapping” gait, in which your foot slaps against the floor. You might start to lose muscle in your lower legs. Numbness and problems with balance may set in. Later, the condition may affect your hands and arms. Usually, that’s as far as it goes, and people can live long, full lives with CMT disease. If you start showing symptoms, see your doctor. You’ll likely be referred to a neurologist, a specialist in thenervous system. They’ll likely take a family history, look at your symptoms, get X-rays and do some tests. Among them: In addition, your doctor may order a DNAbloodtest to see if you carry gene mutations for this condition. A negative test (which means one is not found) can’t rule out CMT disease because not every mutation has been identified. There is no cure for CMT disease. You can manage it in a number of ways. Foot care is important. Doctors urge people to regularly check their feet, keep their nails trimmed, and wear the right kind of shoes. Other things include: In certain cases, your doctor may recommend surgery to repair foot and joint problems. However, the disease’s effects on the nervous system can’t be reversed. You can also check into support groups, including the Charcot-Marie-Tooth Association and theMuscular DystrophyAssociation. Because of Charcot-Marie-Tooth’s effects on joints and movement, it can cause other problems: SOURCES: Charcot-Marie-Tooth Association: “What is CMT?” National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: “Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Fact Sheet.” American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons: “Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease.” National Institute on Drug Abuse for Teachers: “Nerve Cells and Neurotransmission.” Mayo Clinic: “Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.” Muscular Dystrophy Association: “Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease (CMT).” American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society: “Hammertoe.” CMT Journal: “Possible Complications of CMT.” Clinical Orthopaedics and Related Research:“Hip dysplasia is more severe in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease than in developmental dysplasia of the hip.” Learn how this disease affects the nervous system. Causes of spasms and cramps. Tips to stay smart, sharp, and focused. What is it used for? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.