Salmonellais the type of bacteria that’s the most frequently reported cause of food-related illness in the United States. You can’t see, smell, or taste it. Illness from these bacteria is officially called salmonellosis. It can cause anupset stomach,diarrhea,fever, andpainand cramping in your belly. Most people get better on their own at home within 4 to 7 days. Salmonellainfections are very common. When people mentionfood poisoning, they’re usually talking about salmonella. Tens of millions of cases are reported around the world every year. In severe cases, you need to go to the hospital. Rarely, it can be life-threatening. Infections are more common in the summer than the winter. This is because salmonella grows quickly in higher temperatures, when food isn’t refrigerated. People and animals can carry salmonella in theirintestinesand their feces. The bacteria often spread through contaminated foods. Common food sources of salmonella infection include: You can also get salmonella directly through:  Children, especially those under 5, are more likely than adults to get sick from salmonella. Older adults and people with weak immune systems are also more likely to be infected. Other risk factors include:  Most of the signs and symptoms of a salmonella infection arestomach-related. They include: Symptoms tend to start 8 to 72 hours after infection. Most symptoms usually don’t last more than a week, but it can take several months for your bowel movements to get back to normal. When should I call a doctor? See your doctor if you’re still having general symptoms more than a week after first getting the infection. A young child, an older adult, or someone who has a weakened immune system should see a doctor if they have any of these symptoms for more than a couple of days:  You can become dehydrated if you don’t get enough fluids to replace what you lose because of diarrhea. A few people who get a salmonella infection also get pain in their joints. You might hear a doctor call itreactive arthritisor Reiter’s syndrome. It can last several months or longer. This condition can alsocause painwhile peeing and itchy, stinging, or soreeyes. If the salmonella infection gets into yourblood, it can infect other parts of your body, including:  Your doctor may have you take blood tests, or they might ask for a sample of your poop. Sometimes, they may want to do testing to figure out the exact kind of bacteria you have. This can help health officials trace the source if there’s anoutbreakin your area. For healthy adults:If you have diarrhea, drink a lot ofwaterand other fluids. Your doctor might suggest that you drink a rehydration liquid likePedialyteor take a medication likeloperamide(Imodium) if your diarrhea is severe. If your doctor confirms that you have a salmonella infection, they might prescribe antibiotics. Take them exactly as directed, and be sure to finish the prescription. For children:If your child has ahealthy immune system, the doctor might just let the infection run its course. If they have a high fever, you may want to giveacetaminophen. As with adults, they should drink lots ofwater. In special cases:Infants, the elderly, and people who have weakened immune systems may need antibiotics. Salmonella can hide in a variety of foods, but you can do a lot of things to help ensure the bacteria stay away:  SOURCES: CDC: “Salmonella,” “Foods That Can Cause Food Poisoning,” “Salmonella and Food,” “Salmonella Questions and Answers.” World Health Organization: “Salmonella (non-typhoidal).” Foodsafety.org: “Sneaky Salmonella: It’s Common, Costly, and Preventable.” Mayo Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions – Salmonella Infection.” National Health Service (U.K.): “Salmonella infection.” Kids Health from Nemours: “Salmonella Infections.” Foodsafety.gov: “Salmonella.” U.S. Department of Agriculture Food Safety and Inspection Service: “Salmonella Questions and Answers.” FDA: “Think Food Safety and Be Salmonella Safe!” What do you know about listeria? Simple tips to avoid illness. When to call the doctor. Should you be concerned? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.