Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is an infection of the organs of a women’s reproductive system. They include the uterus, ovaries, fallopian tubes, and cervix. It’s usually caused by a sexually transmitted infection (STI), likechlamydiaorgonorrhea. PID cancause painin your lower belly and hurt your ability to have a baby if it’s not treated properly. About 770,000 women in the United States are diagnosed with PID each year. You might not notice any symptoms of PID early on. But as the infection gets worse, you can have: Call your doctor right away if you have any of these symptoms. Some can also be signs of other conditions, so your doctor will most likely run some tests to figure out whether you have PID or something else. PID can cause serious problems if it’s not treated. For example, you might have trouble getting pregnant or have pain in your pelvic area that doesn’t go away. In some cases, PID can bring on more intense symptoms, and you’ll need to go to the emergency room. Get medical help right away if you have: Some of these also can be signs of other serious medical conditions, likeappendicitisor anectopic pregnancy(a pregnancy that happens outside the womb). You would need medical help right away for these as well. Treating a STI right away can help keep you from getting PID. Symptoms of STI are a lot like those of PID. They include heavy discharge from your vagina with an unpleasant odor, pain when you pee, and bleeding between periods. Call your doctor as soon as you notice any of these to lower your chances of PID. When you visit your doctor, they’ll probably give you apelvic examination. They’ll check for signs of tenderness in yourcervix, uterus, or surrounding organs (ovaries and fallopian tubes). They’ll also: Your doctor may check fluid samples under a microscope and send cultures for gonorrhea and chlamydia to the lab. They might also recommend some tests including: If the exam or your tests show a high suspicion for PID, your doctor will talk to you about what treatment you need to get rid of it. If your doctor diagnoses PID, you should tell anyone you’ve hadsexwith in the past 60 days about your illness. If it’s been longer than 60 days since you’ve had sex, tell your most recent partner, who should also get treated. You should not have sex while you’re undergoing treatment for PID, and neither should your partner. If you have PID, your doctor will most likely treat you withantibiotics, but sometimes you may need to be admitted to the hospital. Several different types ofantibioticshave been found to work against the illness, and you may be given several types to take together. You’ll most likely be taking antibiotics for 2 weeks. You should always follow the directions and take all of them, even if you feel better. Your symptoms should improve within 3 days. If they don’t, you should go back to your doctor, because you may need to try something else. In more serious cases, your treatment may include a stay in the hospital. There may be several reasons for this: SOURCES: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID).” CDC: “Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.” Infectious Diseases in Obstetrics and Gynecology:“Treatment of Acute Pelvic Inflammatory Disease.” National Health Service (U.K.): “Complications of pelvic inflammatory disease.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.