Mumps is an infection caused by a virus that’s easily spread throughsalivaandmucus. It usually happens in kids who haven’t been immunized. Mumps can affect any part of the body, but it mostly affectssaliva-making glands below and in front of theears(called parotid glands). Those glands can swell if infected. In fact, puffy cheeks and a swollen jaw are the telltale signs of the virus. Mumps used to be common. But since the introduction of themeasles, mumps, andrubella(MMR)vaccinein 1967, it’s been almost fully wiped out. Symptoms don’t begin until about 2 weeks after you’re infected. The classic signs are pain and swelling in your face and jaw. You may notice other symptoms a few days before that, including: Fatigue Fever Headache Loss of appetite Muscle aches Weakness A virus called a paramyxovirus causes mumps.It’s very easy to catch it from someone else if you come in contact with their saliva ormucus. Infected people can spread it by: Coughing,sneezing, or talking Sharing cups and utensils with others Not properly washing their hands and touching items that other people then touch Close contact from certain sports or kissing If you get mumps, there’s no treatment. That’s becauseantibioticsdon’t work on a virus. You have to simply let it run its course. Talk to your doctor about what you can do to help manage you or your child’s symptoms. Their suggestions may include: Use cold or warm packs on swollen areas Drink lots of fluids Eat soft foods Rest Take over-the-counter, non-aspirin pain relievers If you think you have mumps or have been around someone who has, see your doctor to get tested right away. It doesn’t happen often,but mumps can lead to some serious problems. That’s more likely if you get it as an adult than a child. Some possible complications are: Inflammationof the ovaries,breasttissue, and testicles in males who’ve already gone throughpuberty Inflammation in thebrain, called encephalitis Inflammation in the membrane that covers the brain and spinal cord, called meningitis Hearing loss Heart problems Miscarriage if infected during pregnancy Pancreatitis The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  recommends children get two doses of thevaccine. They should get the first at 12-15 months old and the second between 4 and 6 years.Teensand adults should make sure their MMR vaccinations are up to date. If you haven’t been vaccinated, you can get mumps. Some people have it without knowing it. Most recover completely in a few weeks. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Mumps.” Mayo Clinic: “Mumps.” CDC: “Mumps.” American Medical Association: “AMA Supports Tighter Limitations on Immunization Opt Outs.” Boosters needed to protect and maintain their health. Vaccines children should get and when they’re needed. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.