This is a kind ofskin cancerthat affects the upper layer (epidermis) of yourskin. Another name for it issquamous cell carcinomain situ. “In situ” means thecancer“sits in” the upper layer and hasn’t spread into deeper ones. It usually affects white adults over age 60. Men seem to get it more often than women. Bowen’s disease causes reddish, sometimes brown, patches on sun-damaged skin, most often on your legs. You may also see the patches on your head, neck, palms of your hands, and soles of yourfeet. Sometimes they develop around the genitals. Most people develop only one patch, but you can have several of them. They usually don’t cause any discomfort, but they may be: Patches that appear on the genitals can cause problems. In that area, Bowen’s disease may be called one of the following: Bowenoid papulosis is caused byHPV(human papillomavirus), which also cancause genital wartsandcervical cancer. The virus is the most common sexually transmitted infection in the U.S. Sexually active people under 30 are at the highest risk for it, because it’s most often passed through skin-to-skin contact. Scientists aren’t sure exactly what causes the other forms of Bowen’s disease. However, long-term sun exposure and aging may increase your odds of getting many skin cancers, including this one. Poisoning with arsenic also appears to make you more likely to get this early form ofskin cancer. You can’t always tell by looking at your skin if you have Bowen’s disease. Many other skin conditions can look the same. It can be mistaken for harmless disorders -- likerashesoreczema-- as well as life-threatening ones, includingmelanoma. Your doctor usually has to take a sample of your skin for testing (biopsy) to confirm it. Bowen’s disease can spread to deeper layers of your skin. Your doctor (a dermatologist, who specializes in skin care and treatment) probably will recommend something called surgical excision. They’ll gently remove the cancerous area and about a quarter-inch beyond it. If you have a larger patch, you may need a more detailed procedure called Mohs surgery. A thin layer of tissue is removed and looked at under a microscope. Ifcancercells are seen in the outside edges of the tissue, another thin layer is removed and studied. When nocancercells are found, the surgery is over. Besides surgery, other treatment options are: If you have Bowen’s disease, you’re at a higher risk for other types of skin cancers, especially if you have a weakimmune systemfrom disease or medical treatments. You should have regular follow-ups and skin checks with your doctor. SOURCES: American Cancer Society: “What are basal and squamous cell skin cancers?” American Osteopathic College of Dermatology: “Bowen’s Disease.” Mayo Clinic: “Fluorouracil (Topical Route),” “Imiquimod.” National Association of Rare Disorders: “Bowen’s Disease.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: “Bowenoid Papulosis.” Skin Cancer Foundation: “Mohs Micrographic Surgery: An Overview.” What you need to know. How they work for blood cancers. Separate fact from fiction. And how to best treat them. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.