You may sometimes notice athletes or celebrities with purple circles on theirskinfrom cupping. Or maybe you know someone who swears byacupuncturefor theirback painor herbal teas forcolds. More and more, people use practices like these from traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) to not only fight disease, but also prevent it. TCM is an ancient system of health and wellness that’s been used in China for thousands of years. Western medicine focuses mainly on treating disease. But TCM looks at your entire well-being. Is it safe to try and will it work? With a little background on how it’s used, you can make more informed choices to improve your health. Western medicine tends to view the body a lot like a car. It has different systems that need the right inputs and outputs. It’s very concrete and logical. TCM, on the other hand, doesn’t focus on science and medicine. Instead, it’s based on balance, harmony, and energy. There are two central ideas behind TCM: Qi:This is also called life energy or vital energy. The belief is that it runs throughout your body. It’s always on the move and constantly changes. TCM treatments often focus on ways to promote and maintain the flow of qi. Yin and Yang:These are opposites that describe the qualities of qi. The belief is that everything in life has a little bit of its opposite, too, and balance is the key. For example, a drug from your doctor might heal disease. But it’s dangerous if you take too much of it. According to TCM, these ideas play out in our bodies. When you balance the yin and yang of Qi, you feel healthy and well. If they’re out of whack, you feel sick. TCM aims to create harmony and a healthy flow of qi. What Kind of Practices Does TCM Use? Several. They include: Experts believe it’s safe, if you go to someone who knows what they're doing. This is especially true of acupuncture, tai chi, cupping, and moxibustion. Herbs can be a little trickier. They don’t go through the same FDA process as drugs. That means there’s not as much research on them, and it can be hard to know exactly what’s in them. Plus, herbs can have side effects or impact other medicine you’re taking. Again, it’s important to go to someone who really understands their practice. And always check with your doctor first. TCM is an approach that covers a lot of ground, and results vary. The practices haven’t been studied in the same way as Western medicine. More research has been done on herbs and acupuncture than other treatments. But studies show a lot of promise:   That’s a personal decision. People use TCM for anything fromcarpal tunnel syndrometo lowering stress. Sometimes they use it along with Western medicine. It may be a good choice if you: In general, doctors suggest you don’t use it to totally replace Western medicine, especially if you have a serious condition likecancerorliverdisease. They also urge caution, especially with herbs, if you’re: They want to see proof that something is safe and works well before they suggest you try it. That often makes it hard for them to recommend TCM. But on the whole, research and interest in TCM is on the rise. You can also find many leading health care centers, like the Mayo Clinic, Cleveland Clinic, and Johns Hopkins offering TCM practices such as acupuncture and herbal treatments. Your best bet is to find someone certified by the Accreditation Committee for Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine (ACAOM). They accredit schools that teach TCM, and you can check their website to find someone. Another option is to get in touch with a school of Oriental medicine. They can sometimes refer you to their alumni. Check with your family and friends as well -- just do your research to make sure you go to someone you can trust. SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Complementary and Alternative Medicine,” “Meditation” and “Acupuncture.” Cleveland Clinic: “Chinese Herbal Therapy” and “Acupuncture.” University of Minnesota, Taking Charge of Your Health and Wellbeing: “Traditional Chinese Medicine.” University of New Hampshire Health Services: “Traditional Chinese Medicine.” NIH, National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health: “Traditional Chinese Medicine: In Depth.” Cancer Research UK: “Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM).” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “What Is Chinese Medicine?” and  “Acupuncture Program.” Harvard Medical School: “What Exactly Is Cupping?” PubMed: “Does the burning of moxa (Artemisia vulgaris) in traditional Chinese medicine constitute a health hazard?” and “Wet cupping therapy for treatment of herpes zoster: a systematic review of randomized controlled trials.” U.S. National Library of Medicine: "Yin and Yang." University of New Hampshire  website: "Traditional Chinese Medicine." 6 health benefits of yoga. 10 relaxation techniques to try. Different hues may affect your mood, diet, and more. Learn why you are the way you are. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.