Retinitis pigmentosa(RP) is a term for a group ofeyediseases that can lead to loss of sight. What they have in common are specific changes your doctor sees when they look at your retina -- a bundle of tissue at the back of your eye. When you have RP, cells in the retina called photoreceptors don’t work the way they're supposed to, and over time, you lose your sight. It’s a rare disorder that’s passed from parent to child. Only 1 out of every 4,000 people get it. About half of all people with RP have a family member who also has it. The retina has two types of cells that gather light: rods and cones. The rods are around the outer ring of the retina and are active in dim light. Most forms of retinitis pigmentosa affect the rods first. Yournight visionand your ability to see to the side --peripheral vision-- go away. Cones are mostly in the center of your retina. They help you see color and fine detail. When RP affects them, you slowly lose your central vision and your ability to see color. Retinitis pigmentosa usually starts in childhood. But exactly when it starts and how quickly it gets worse varies from person to person. Most people with RP lose much of their sight by early adulthood. Then by age 40, they are oftenlegally blind.   Because rods are usually affected first, the first symptom you may notice is that it takes longer to adjust to darkness (called “night blindness). For example, you may notice it when you walk from bright sunshine into a dimly lit theater. You may trip over objects in the dark or not be able to drive at night. You may lose your peripheral vision at the same time or soon after your night vision declines. You may get "tunnelvision," which means you can’t see things to the side without turning your head. In later stages, your cones may be affected. That will make it harder for you to do detail work, and you may havetrouble seeingcolors. It’s rare, but sometimes the cones die first. You might find bright lights uncomfortable -- a symptom your doctor may callphotophobia. You also may start to see flashes of light that shimmer or blink. This is called photopsia. More than 60 different genes can cause the different types of retinitis pigmentosa. Parents can pass the problem genes on to their children in three different ways: Autosomal recessive RP:Each parent has one problem copy and one normal copy of the gene that's responsible, but they don’t have any symptoms. A child that inherits two problem copies of the gene (one from each parent) will develop this type ofretinitispigmentosa. Since two copies of the problem gene are needed, each child in the family has a 25% chance of being affected. Autosomal dominant RP:This type of retinitis pigmentosa requires only one copy of the problem gene to develop. A parent with that gene has a 50% chance of passing it to each child. X-linked RP:A mother who carries the problem gene can pass it down to their children. Each one of them has a 50% chance of getting it. Most women who carry the gene won’t have any symptoms. But about 1 out of every 5 will have mild symptoms. Most men who get it will have more severe cases. An eye doctor (ophthalmologist) can tell you if you have retinitis pigmentosa. They’ll look into your eyes and do some special tests: If you or anyone in your family is diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa, all family members should go to the eye doctor for screening. There’s no cure for retinitis pigmentosa, but doctors are working hard to find new treatments. A few options can slow yourvision lossand may even restore some sight: Other treatments under review include: Devices and tools can help you make the most of your vision, and rehab services can help you stay independent. SOURCES: American Academy of Ophthalmology: "Retinitis Pigmentosa," "What Is Macular Edema?" Foundation Fighting Blindness: "Retinitis Pigmentosa." Genetics Home Reference: "retinitis pigmentosa." Medscape: "Retinitis Pigmentosa." National Center for Biotechnology Information: "Advances in gene therapy technologies to treat retinitis pigmentosa." National Eye Institute: "Facts About Retinitis Pigmentosa." PubMed Health: “Photoreceptor Cells (Photosensitive Cells).” RP Fighting Blindness: "About RP." U.S. Food and Drug Administration: "Argus II Retinal Prosthesis System - H110002." Learn about causes, symptoms, and treatments. Simple annoyance or the sign of a problem? Symptoms, triggers, and treatments. Warning signs, myths, and facts. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.