Kernicterusis a rare kind of preventablebrain damagethat can happen in newborns withjaundice. Jaundice is a yellow coloring of theskinand other tissues that affects about 60%-80% of infants in the United States. It happens when babies build up too much of a chemical called bilirubin in theirblood. Normally, this condition goes away on its own. It’s only when the bilirubin level stays too high and isn’t treated that jaundice becomes kernicterus and causes brain damage. That is called bilirubin-induced neurologic dysfunction, or BIND. When yourbabydevelops jaundice, the change in skin tone usually is seen in their face first. As the bilirubin level gets higher, the symptoms can move to the rest of their body, including their chest,abdomen, arms, and legs. It’s harder to see in babies with darker skin. It can also show up in the whites of yourbaby’seyes. If yourbabyhas any of the symptoms of jaundice, it’s important to see the doctor immediately. Most cases of jaundice don’t require treatment, but if it goes on too long, complications can occur and it can lead to kernicterus. Symptoms of kernicterus can vary, but may include: Other symptoms of kernicterus can develop as a child gets older: Babies usually have their highest bilirubin level when they’re 3 to 5 days old. Newborns should be watched for jaundice every 8 to 12 hours during the first 2 days of their lives. They should then be rechecked before they’re 5 days old. Doctors can test the bilirubin level of yournewbornwith a light meter before they leave the hospital. If the result is high, the doctor can order abloodtest for further evaluation. A blood test is the most accurate way to measure bilirubin levels. If your baby’s bilirubin level is too high, they’ll receive specific treatments depending on how many hours old they are and whether they have certain risk factors. The doctor may order more blood tests after treatment to make sure the level is going back toward a normal range. Mild jaundice may not require treatment, but if their bilirubin level is high, or if your baby has certain risk factors (like being born prematurely), treatment may be necessary. The options may include: Providing enoughbreastmilk and/orformula. If your baby isn’t getting enough fluids, they may not be getting rid of enough of the yellow pigment of jaundice through theirurineand stool. Newborns should have at least six wet diapers a day, and their stool should change from dark green to yellow if they’re starting to get enoughnutrition. They should also seem satisfied when they’ve had enough to eat. Phototherapy (light therapy). This involves using a special blue light on a baby’s skin in the hospital or at home to break down bilirubin. This makes it easier for a baby’s body to pass it. At one time, experts thought sunlight could help treat jaundice, but it’s no longer recommended because it can lead to sunburn. Phototherapy is considered very safe, although it may cause some temporary side effects like a loose stool and arash. Fluids.It is important for newborns to get enough fluids during phototherapy. Breast orbottle feedingshould continue. If a baby is severely dehydrated, IV fluids may be needed. Blood transfusion. This is done if a baby isn’t responding to other treatments and it’s necessary to quickly lower their bilirubin level. It’s only done if a baby is showing signs of brain damage from too much bilirubin. SOURCES: UpToDate: “Patient education: Jaundice in newborn infants (Beyond the Basics).” National Organization for Rare Disorders (NORD): “Kernicterus.” CDC: “Facts about Jaundice and Kernicterus.” Merck Manual: “Kernicterus.” Children’s Mercy Kansas City: “Introduction: Jaundice and Kernicterus Jaundice.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.