Do you struggle when the alarm goes off every morning? If you have areallyhard time, you could have something called dysania. This means you simply can’t get out of bed for about 1 to 2 hours after you wake up. Doctors don’t recognize it as a medical condition, as it is not an official diagnosis. But if you experience it, you know it can be a serious problem. When you can’t get going in the morning every day, it can impact every aspect of your life. Your family, boss, co-workers, and friends might not understand why you can’t function. If you have dysania, it doesn’t mean you’re lazy. You could have underlying issues that are to blame for your extremefatigue. Dysania can be a symptom of many medical conditions. Some common ones are: Sometimes, the medicines used to treat these problems can cause the fatigue that leads to dysania. This includesantidepressants. In one study, more than 90% of people with major depressive disorder were very tired. This was true even though more than 80% of them were already takingantidepressantmeds. Without proper treatment, your condition could get worse. If you have depression, this can be dangerous because an untreatedmental healthdisorder could make you more likely to harm yourself. Low activity and too much sleep can also be bad for your health. The recommended amount of sleep for most adults is 6 to 8 hours per night. A 2014 study showed that people who slept longer than 10 hours a day were more likely to have psychiatric illnesses and a higherbody mass index(BMI). In a 2018 paper published in theEuropean Heart Journal, researchers found a link between sleeping more than the recommended amount and a higher risk of heart disease,stroke, and death. Specifically, those who slept more than 10 hours a day had a 41% greater risk. Dysania isn’t a disease. It’s a serious symptom of an underlying condition. To treat it, you need to find and address the root cause or causes. If you have serious, long-term problems with getting out of bed, see your doctor. Before your visit, it might help to make a list of: Treating your underlying condition will go a long way toward helping you resolve your issues with waking up. Whatever the cause, it will help to practice good sleep habits: Certain medicines or other therapies can also help you get a better night’s rest. It’s important to see your doctor if you think you have dysania, or any sleep problem, so you can get the help you need. SOURCES: Verrillo, E.Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A Treatment Guide (2ndedition), 2012. American Psychiatric Association: “What is Depression?” CDC: “Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.” Arthritis Foundation: “What is Fibromyalgia?” Piedmont Healthcare: “Too much sleep can be a sign of an underlying health condition.” Johns Hopkins Medicine: “Oversleeping: Bad for Your Health?” Innovations in Clinical Neuroscience:“Fatigue as a Residual Symptom of Depression.” ULifeline: “When left untreated, depression can have serious consequences.” Léger, D.PLoS One, published online Sept 16, 2014. European Society of Cardiology: “Too much or too little sleep linked to increased risk of cardiovascular disease and death.” National Sleep Foundation: “Healthy Sleep Tips,” “Why Electronics May Stimulate You Before Bed.” Sleep Health Foundation: “Caffeine, Food, Alcohol, Smoking and Sleep.” Mayo Clinic: “Preparing for Your Appointment: What Can You Do?” Michael Smith, PhD, assistant professor of psychiatry, Center for Mind-Body Research, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore. Differences between feeling depressed or feeling blue. Signs of mania and depression. Causes, symptoms, and therapies. When food controls you. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.