Many pregnant women havemorning sickness. But for a few, it’s much more intense. Less than 3% of pregnant women get something calledhyperemesis gravidarum. There's no cure for it, but it's temporary, and there are ways to manage it.  When you have hyperemesis gravidarum, you vomit a lot, sometimes almost constantly. This can lead to problems likedehydrationand weight loss. Morning sickness often fades by the end of thefirst trimester, but hyperemesis gravidarum usually lasts longer. It generally strikes between the 4th and 6th week of pregnancy, and may be at its worst around weeks 9 to 13. Thevomitingis so severe, most women are unable to go about their typical daily activities. Symptoms usually get better by the 20th week, but not always. Doctors don't know what causes it, but they believe it's related to a rise in hormone levels. Women who had the condition during their first pregnancy have a higher chance of getting it again during the next one. There’s no known way to prevent it, though taking a multivitaminbefore getting pregnantmay help a little. Hyperemesis gravidarum can cause problems for both you and your baby. It can affect: Your doctor will need to help you manage this. Without treatment, there’s a higher chance your baby will be born prematurely or have a low birth weight. Either of these can put them at risk for health problems. Treatment depends on your symptoms and how the condition is affecting your health. Up to 5% of women with the condition need to check in to a hospital. Your doctor may first recommend: Pyridoxine. This vitamin, known as vitamin B6, is often prescribed for nausea in pregnancy. Typical doses are 10 mg to 25 mg, 3 times a day. Taking more may lead to temporary nerve damage. Thiamine.This vitamin (also called vitamin B1) in doses of 1.5 milligrams a day may ease vomiting. If you're still throwing up and dehydrated, your doctor may recommend you check in to the hospital. Once there you may get: Once you aren't vomiting so much and are able to hold down food and remain hydrated, you may be able to stop treatments. Try to remember that it does eventually stop -- and the birth of your baby will follow. SOURCES: Wegrzyniak, L.Reviews in Obstetrics and Gynecology,May 2012. Suzuki, S.North American Journal of Medical Sciences, November 2009. Jueckstock, J.BMC Medicine, published online July 2010. Medscape: “ACOG Guidelines for Treating Nausea and Vomiting in Pregnant Women Reviewed.” Kaiser Permanente: “Electrolyte Disturbances.” UptoDate: “Treatment and outcome of nausea and vomiting of pregnancy.” University of Michigan/Michigan Medicine: "Vitamin B6 for Morning Sickness."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.