When many people hear the term “gangrene,” they may think of toes or fingers being affected by loss of blood flow, infection, or hypothermia, which means the person’s body temperature has dropped, and remained, below 95 degrees. But with Fournier’s gangrene, your genitals and the area around them are affected. And hypothermia or circulation problems don't cause it. Gangrene happens when body tissue is dead or is dying (known as necrosis) because of a lack of blood flow or a bacterial infection. Fournier’s gangrene involves an infection in the scrotum (which includes the testicles), penis, or perineum. The perineum is the area between the scrotum and anus for a man; or the area between the anus and vulva for a woman. The dead or dying tissue in people with this type of gangrene is often found in the genitals and can stretch to the thighs,stomach, and chest. Fournier’s gangrene is rare. While it’s more common in men, women and children also can get it. The disease is most often found in men between the ages of 50 and 60. Men are 10 times more likely than women to have Fournier’sgangrene. Fournier’s gangrene is even rarer in children. Fournier’s gangrene usually happens because of an infection in, or near, your genitals. Sources of the infection can include: In children, the causes can include: While not actually considered causes of Fournier’s gangrene, there are other conditions and medications that experts believe may make you more likely to get this disease, including: Doctors can find the cause of Fournier’s gangrene in about 90% of the cases. People with Fournier’s gangrene can have various symptoms, including: You should see a doctor immediately. Treatments include: You may also need reconstructive surgery after your infection is under control. And some people need colostomies (for getting rid of poop) and catheters (for getting rid of pee), depending on the area that’s affected. Some people also needhyperbaric oxygen therapy-- this means you are given pure oxygen while in a pressurized room. You may also get atetanus shotif you have an injury. There are some steps you can take to lower your chances of getting Fournier’s gangrene: Mayo Clinic: "Diseases and Conditions – Gangrene." National Organization for Rare Diseases: "Fournier Gangrene." Radiological Society of North America: "Radiographics – Fournier Gangrene: Role of Imaging." Medscape: "Fournier Gangrene." See how one patient learned to manage her weight and diet. Are your 'good' habits doing harm? How they help diabetes. Are you at risk? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.