Turner syndrome is a rare genetic disorder that’s found only in girls. It can cause problems ranging from short height toheartdefects. Sometimes, the symptoms are so mild that it doesn’t get diagnosed until a female is ateenor young adult. The condition can cause symptoms throughout your life, but treatments and continued research help people manage their condition. Turner syndrome happens when a female is missing certain genes that are normally on the X chromosome. (Females have two X chromosomes. Males have an X and a Y). Some girls with Turner are actually missing a whole copy of the X chromosome. For others, just part of one containing the particular set of genes is missing. The different ways genes can be affected include: Monosomy. A problem with the mom’s egg or dad’s sperm causes an absence of the X chromosome in every cell of the body. Mosaicism. When cell division during early stages of fetal development doesn’t happen correctly, some cells in the body get two complete copies of the X chromosome. Other cells have only one copy. X chromosome abnormalities. Cells have one complete copy and one abnormal or missing copy of the X chromosome. Y chromosome material. In a few cases, some cells get one copy of the X chromosome and other cells get one copy of the X chromosome and some Y chromosome material. Biologically, you develop as a female. The Y chromosome material increases your risk of a type of cancer called gonadoblastoma. About 70,000 U.S. women and girls live with it. Research has found that almost 99% of babies missing the chromosome are miscarried. But about 1% of the time, these babies are born, and they have the syndrome. Signs of Turner syndrome can start even before birth, and they give parents some idea that their baby might be born with the condition. Anultrasoundof a baby with it may showheartandkidneyproblems or a buildup of fluid. ADNA testusing a blood sample from the mother can also screen for Turner syndrome before birth. At birth or during infancy, girls might have a number of physical features that point to the condition. Swollen hands and feet or smaller than average height at birth are among them. Others include: In older females, throughout the lifespan, symptoms can continue. They can include: Beginning at birth and continuing throughout a person’s life, Turner syndrome can be linked with other health conditions. They might include: Women with Turner have trouble conceiving. If you’re able to becomepregnant,high blood pressureandgestational diabetesmight be issues. If anultrasoundshows something abnormal while you’re pregnant, your doctor may want to examine your baby’s chromosomes with a karyotype. This test compares chromosomes by lining them up. To get samples from you, your doctor may recommend: If a diagnosis isn’t made before or at birth, other lab tests that check hormones,thyroidfunction andblood sugarcan help diagnose it. Because of the problems linked to Turner syndrome, doctors will also often suggest tests for the kidneys, heart, and hearing. Medical care often calls for a team of specialists that’s built around the specific needs of each person, because the cases vary so widely. There’s no cure, but most girls will take the same main therapies during childhood and the teen years. These are: Almost all women with the condition needfertility treatmentsto become pregnant. And carrying a child can come with health risks. If you have Turner syndrome, you should discuss those issues with your doctor. SOURCES: National Institutes of Health-U.S. National Library of Medicine Genetics Home Reference: “Turner Syndrome,” “X chromosome.” Turner Syndrome Society of the United States: “About Turner Syndrome.” Medscape: “Turner Syndrome.” Mayo Clinic: “Turner Syndrome.” National Organization for Rare Disorders, “Turner Syndrome.” American Thyroid Association, “Hypothyroidism.” American Family Physician: “Turner Syndrome: Diagnosis and Management.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.