Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a serious lung disease. When you breathe in, oxygen moves through tiny air sacs in your lungs and into your bloodstream. From there, it travels to your organs. IPF causes scar tissue to grow inside your lungs and makes it hard to breathe. It gets worse over time. IPF scar tissue is thick, like the scars you get on your skin after a cut. It slows oxygen flow from your lungs to your blood, which can keep your body from working as it should. There’s no cure for IPF. For most people, symptoms don’t get better, but treatments can slow the damage to your lungs. Everyone’s outlook is different. Some people will get worse quickly, while others can live 10 years or more after diagnosis. There are treatments to help you breathe easier and manage your symptoms. You may be able to have a lung transplant. You can have idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis for a long time without noticing any symptoms. After many years, the scarring in your lungs gets worse, and you might have: Other symptoms of IPF include: Some people get pulmonary fibrosis when they're exposed to something like pollution, certain medicines, or an infection. But doctors don't know what causes IPF. That's what idiopathic means. Some risk factors might make you more likely to get IPF: IPF is hard to tell apart from other lung diseases because it shares many of the same signs. It may take time and a lot of doctor visits to get the right diagnosis. If you have trouble breathing that doesn’t get better, you’ll probably need to see a pulmonologist, a doctor who treats lung problems. The doctor will use a stethoscope to listen to your lungs. They might ask questions like: The doctor also will give you one or more of these tests: You might want to ask: Treatments for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis won't cure the disease, but they can make it easier for you to breathe. Some may keep your lungs from getting worse quickly. Your doctor may suggest: Some people with IPF can get a lung transplant. Doctors usually recommend it if your IPF is severe or gets worse quickly. Getting a new lung or lungs can help you live longer, but it is major surgery. If you fit the criteria for a lung transplant, your doctor will put you on a waiting list for a lung from a donor. After your transplant, you could be in the hospital for 3 weeks or longer. You'll need to take drugs for the rest of your life that keep your body from rejecting your new lung. You’ll also have routine tests to see how well your lungs are working and regular physical therapy. If you're thinking about a lung transplant, you'll need emotional support from family and friends. Support groups can help by putting you in touch with people who are also getting or have had transplants. Ask your doctor about programs that can help explain what to expect before and after the surgery. Scientists are also studying new treatments for IPF in clinical trials. These trials test new drugs to see if they’re safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine not everyone can get. Your doctor can tell you if one of these trials might be good for you. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is a serious disease. It will have a big effect on your life and your loved ones. To stay as healthy as possible, follow your treatment plan, and see your doctor regularly to make sure your treatment is working. Other things you can do to feel better include: It can be hard to manage an illness like IPF. Remember that it’s OK to ask a doctor, counselor, friend, or family member for help with any stress, sadness, or anger you may feel. Support groups are good places to talk to other people who are living with IPF or a similar condition. They can give you and your family advice and understanding. The scar tissue in your lungs makes it hard for your body to get oxygen, which puts a strain on your other organs. IPF can raise your odds of getting other conditions, including: Ask your doctor what you can do to lower your chances of having these problems. There may be treatments that can help with these conditions, too. Everyone with IPF is different. For some, the disease gets worse quickly. For others, it can be a slow process in which their lungs stay the same for a long time. Talk to your doctor about your condition and what you can do to manage it. Average survival is 3 to 5 years, but some people live much longer. A lung transplant can also change your life expectancy. To learn more about IPF or find a support group in your area, visit the website of the Pulmonary Fibrosis Foundation. SOURCES: American Thoracic Society: "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis (IPF)." Cleveland Clinic: "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis." Coalition for Pulmonary Fibrosis: "Facts About Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis," "What is Pulmonary Fibrosis?" National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute: "How is Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis Treated?" "What is Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis?" "Living With Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis." Pulmonary Fibrosis Foundation: "About IPF." Canadian Lung Association: “Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.” You may not even know you have it. Signs of this potentially fatal complication. When a cold becomes bronchitis. Causes behind painful breathing, fluid buildup. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.