Placental abruptionis something that can happen suddenly duringpregnancy. It can be dangerous for you and yourbaby. Fortunately, it’s not common. Yourplacentadevelops in your uterus while you’re pregnant. It sends nutrients and oxygen from you to your baby, and it helps get rid of waste that builds up in your baby’sblood. It’s attached to the wall of your uterus, and your baby is attached to that by their umbilical cord. If you have placental abruption, the placenta separates from your uterus too soon, before your baby is ready to be born. Placental abruption affects about 1% of pregnant woman. It can occur at any time after 20 weeks of pregnancy, but it’s most common in thethird trimester. When it happens, it’s usually sudden. You might noticevaginal bleeding, but there might not be any. The amount of blood can vary. Just because there’s not a lot of blood doesn’t mean the placental abruption isn’t severe. Sometimes, blood gets trapped inside the uterus. Other signs include: Placental abruption can happen little by little, too, called “chronic abruption.” You might notice:  Most of the time, doctors don’t know the cause. But drinkingalcoholor usingcocainewhile you’re pregnant can increase your risk. Other things that can play a role include: You can’t prevent placental abruption, but there are some things you can avoid, such astobacco, alcohol, and drugs to reduce your odds. You should tell your doctor if you’ve had placental abruption before. They’ll monitor you closely. They also may suggest other ways you can prevent it from happening again. If you’re having bleeding orabdominal pain, you’ll need to see your doctor right away. They’ll do aphysical examand run blood tests, and also may perform anultrasoundto see inside your uterus. (Ultrasounds don’t always show placental abruptions). The placenta can’t be reattached, so your treatment options depend on how far along you are in your pregnancy, severity of the abruption and status of mother and baby.  If only a small part of the placenta separates, it may not cause many problems. But if a big part or all of it detaches from your uterus, it can cause serious harm to you and your baby. For you, this could mean: If you have a near or complete abruption, you’ll need to have a C-section right away. Complications for your baby could include:  SOURCES: Mayo Clinic: “Placental abruption,” “Placenta: How it Works, What's Normal?” March of Dimes: “Placental Abruption.” Medscape: “Abruptio Placentae.” Cedars Sinai: “Placental Abruption.”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.