Muscular dystrophyis a group of diseases that make muscles weaker and less flexible over time. It is caused by a problem in the genes that control how the body keeps muscles healthy. For some people, the disease starts early in childhood. Others don’t have any symptoms until they are teenagers or middle-aged adults. How muscular dystrophy affects you or your child depends on the kind. Most people’s condition will get worse over time, and some people may lose the ability to walk, talk, or care for themselves. But that doesn’t happen to everyone. Other people can live for many years with mild symptoms. There are more than 30 kinds of muscular dystrophy, and each is different based on: People usually get one of nine major forms of the disease: There are many treatments that can help keep muscles strong and flexible, and scientists are looking for new ones, too.The important thing is to get the treatment you need and find support. Muscular dystrophy can run in families, or you can be the first one in your family to have it. The condition is caused by problems in your genes. Genes contain the information your cells need to make proteins that control all of the different functions in the body. When a gene has a problem, your cells can make the wrong protein, the wrong amount of it, or a damaged protein. You can get muscular dystrophy even if neither of your parents had the disease. This happens when one of your genes gets a defect on its own. But it’s rare for someone to get it this way. In people with muscular dystrophy, the broken genes are the ones that make the proteins that keep muscles healthy and strong. For example, those with Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophies make too little of a protein called dystrophin, which strengthens muscles and protects them from injury. For most types of muscular dystrophy, symptoms start to show up in childhood or in the teen years. In general, children with the condition: Some will also have symptoms like: Your doctor will need to check different parts of your child’s body to know if they have muscular dystrophy. They’ll start with a generalphysical exam. They’ll also ask you questions about your family’s medical history and the kind of symptoms you’re noticing in your child. They may ask: They also may ask you questions about how your child plays, moves, and speaks, as well as how they act at home and at school. The doctor may use different tests to check for conditions that can cause muscle weakness. Doctors can also test a sample of theirbloodto look for the genes that cause muscular dystrophy. Genetic tests can help diagnose the condition, but they’re also important for people with a family history of the disease who are planning to start a family. You can talk with your doctor or a genetics counselor to find out what the results of this test mean for you and your children. You’ll want to find out as much about your child’s condition as you can to learn how they can stay as healthy as possible. You may want to ask: Right now, there’s no cure for the disease. But there are many treatments that can improve symptoms and make life easier for you and your child. Your doctor will recommend a treatment based on the type of muscular dystrophy your child has. Some of them are: Scientists also are looking for new ways to treat muscular dystrophy in clinical trials. These trials test new drugs to see if they are safe and if they work. They often are a way for people to try new medicine that isn't available to everyone. Your doctor can tell you if one of these trials might be a good fit for your child. It’s hard when your child loses strength and can’t do the things other kids can do. Muscular dystrophy is a challenge, but it doesn’t have to keep your child from enjoying life. There are many things you can do to help them feel stronger and get the most out of life. The disease will most likely have a big impact on your family. Remember that it’s OK to ask a doctor, counselor, family, or friends for help with any stress, sadness, or anger you may feel. Support groups are also good places to talk to other people who have lived with muscular dystrophy. They can help your child connect with others like them and give you and your family advice and understanding. Muscular dystrophy is different for everyone. Some children may lose muscle strength very slowly, giving them and their families time to adjust to the changes. Others will get worse more quickly. Many people with the disease will need wheelchairs and help with daily living at some point, but that’s not always the case. Talk to your doctor about your child’s muscular dystrophy. Together, you can make the best possible treatment plan for them and get the support you need for your family. To learn more about muscular dystrophy or find a support group in your area, visit the web site of theMuscular Dystrophy Association. SOURCES: CDC: "Facts About Muscular Dystrophy," "Treatment and Care." FDA News Release. "FDA grants accelerated approval to first drug for Duchenne muscular dystrophy." National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke: "NINDS Muscular Dystrophy Information Page." News release, Children's National Medical Center. NHS: "Causes of muscular dystrophy." NIH Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development: "What are the types of muscular dystrophy?" "How is muscular dystrophy diagnosed?" "What are the treatments for muscular dystrophy?" Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.