Bone spurs (also called osteophytes) are smooth, hard bumps of extra bone that form on the ends of bones. They often pop up in the joints -- the places where two bones meet. Bone spurs can form on many parts of your body, including your: Most bone spurs don't cause problems. But if they rub against other bones or press on nerves, you might experience pain and stiffness. The most common cause of bone spurs is joint damage from osteoarthritis or degenerative joint disease. The cushioning between your joints and the bones of your spine can wear down with age.Rheumatoid arthritis, lupus, and gout can also damage your joints. Bone spurs also often form after an injury to a joint or tendon. When your body thinks your bone is damaged, it tries to fix it by adding bone to the injured area. Other causes of bone spurs include: You might not realize you have a bone spur until you get an X-ray to look for another condition. They only cause problems when they press on nerves, tendons, or other structures in your body. Then, you might feel any of the following: Your symptoms might get worse when you exercise or try to move the affected joint. A bone spur can break off and get stuck in the lining of the joint. This is called a "loose body." It can lock up the joint and make it hard to move. Often, bone spurs are first evaluated by your regular doctor who will likely refer you to a specialist. You’ll probably need to see a rheumatologist or orthopedic doctor. Rheumatologists specialize in joint problems. Orthopedic doctors focus on the musculoskeletal system. Your doctor will feel the joint to check for a bump. They may also order an X-ray to help them to see the bone spur better. Other tests your doctor can use to diagnose bone spurs include: To relieve pain and bring down swelling, you can try one of these over-the-counter pain relievers: These can cause side effects, especially if you take them in large doses or for a long time. If you've taken them for more than a month, ask your doctor if you can try a different treatment. Other therapies for bone spurs include: If these treatments don't work or the bone spur affects your movement, you might need surgery to remove the extra bone. Bone spurs usually can’t be prevented if they’re the result of the natural wear and tear of arthritis. But you can take these steps to avoid bone spurs caused by other things: See your doctor if you have any signs of joint trouble, like pain, swelling, or stiffness. If you catch and treat arthritis early, you may be able to prevent the damage that leads to bone spurs. SOURCES: American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgery: "Plantar Fasciitis and Bone Spurs." Arthritis Foundation: "51 Ways to Be Good to Your Joints." Cedars-Sinai: "Bone Spurs (Osteophytes.)" Harvard Medical School: "Bone spurs." Institute for Preventive Foot Health: "Prevention and Treatment of Heel Spurs and Bone Spurs." Johns Hopkins Medicine: "Laminectomy." Lehigh Valley Health Network: "Learn About Bone Spurs." Mayo Clinic: "Bone spurs: Causes." "Bone Spurs: Definition," "Bone spurs: Symptoms," "Bone spurs: Tests and Diagnosis," "Bone spurs: Treatments and drugs."  Top causes and how to find relief. 8 exercises for less knee pain. How it helps arthritis, migraines, and dental pain. How much do you know about your meds? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.