TORCH syndromemay sound like a single illness, but actually it stands for a group of infectious diseases that can cause problems -- some serious -- for your unborn baby: Toxoplasmosis Other agents (includingHIV,syphilis, varicella, andfifth disease) Rubella Cytomegalovirus Herpes simplex If you get one of the TORCH infections while you’repregnant, and it spreads through yourbloodto your baby, they can get it, too. And because they're still developing in your uterus, their immune system most likely won’t be able to fight it off. If the disease stays in their body, their organs might not develop correctly. How sick your baby can get depends on several things, including what the condition is and how far along they are in their development. But a number of problems can happen -- fromjaundice(yellowishskinoreyes) and hearing problems to miscarriage and stillbirth. Toxoplasmosis is rare and it’s caused by aparasite. The parasite usually gets into your body through yourmouth, so you can get the disease from eating foods such as undercooked meat. If you’re infected, you can pass the infection on to your unborn baby. Problems your baby can have if they're exposed to toxoplasmosis include: To lower your chances of getting toxoplasmosis: Among the other agents included in TORCH syndrome are HIV,fifth disease, syphilis, and varicella zoster virus. HIV.Almost all U.S. children under age 13 who have HIV got it from their mothers during pregnancy. If you are HIV-positive, tests might not show that your baby has it at birth, but it can show up later, even after they are 6 months old. They might have symptoms like delayed growth,pneumonia, orswollen lymph nodesandabdomen. If you have HIV and are pregnant or planning to become pregnant, anti-retroviralmedicationscan help lower your chances of passing the virus on to your baby. Syphilis.Pregnant women in the first or second stage of thissexually transmitted disease(STD) pass it to their babies 75% of the time if it’s not treated. Syphilis is caused by bacteria and can create serious problems during a baby’s development. Many babies who get it before birth won’t survive full term, or will die shortly after they’re born. Almost half of babies will be stillborn. Babies born with syphilis can have misshapen bones,anemia,meningitis,skin rashes, and nerve problems that can cause blindness anddeafness. If you’re pregnant, you should be tested for syphilis. If you test positive, your doctor can treat it withantibiotics. Fifth disease.This disease is caused by parvovirus B19. It’s seldom a problem for pregnant women or their babies. About half of women are immune to the virus, so their babies won’t get fifth disease. Those babies that do can getanemia. Less than 5% of the time, women have problems that cause them to miscarry. Since there’s novaccineor medication to prevent fifth disease, it’s important towash your handswith soap and water often, and avoid being around sick people. If you’re pregnant, talk to your doctor about the risks. Varicella.Chickenpox is caused by the varicella zoster virus, and it also causescongenital varicella syndromein babies. It’s unlikely you would pass varicella on to your baby. Even if you have chickenpox while you’re pregnant, there’s still only a 2% chance you’ll pass it on. However, babies born with congenital varicella can havebirth defects. If you’ve never had chickenpox and never been vaccinated, you should get vaccinated at least a month before you plan toget pregnant. And tell your doctor if you think you’ve been exposed to chickenpox while pregnant. Rubella, which also is known as German measles, is acontagious diseasecaused by a virus. If you get rubella, you’ll likely have a low-grade fever,sore throat, and arash. If you’re pregnant and get rubella in yourfirst trimester, it’s likely that you’ll pass it on to your baby. It can be very serious -- you could have a miscarriage, or your baby could have severe birth defects. The first 3 months of your pregnancy is when rubella can cause the most problems in your baby’s development. That’s why it’s important to tell your doctor right away if you think you might have gotten it. Because of themeasles-mumps-rubella (MMR)vaccine, the disease is rare in children. There are only about 30 to 60 known cases of it each year in the United States, and fewer than five babies a year are born with it. There’s no cure forcongenital rubella syndrome, so prevention is key. If you’re thinking of becoming pregnant and you haven’t already had theMMR vaccine, you should get it at least 28 days before you conceive. Also known asCMV, cytomegalovirus is an infection in theherpesvirus group. And it’s estimated that 50% of adults have it by the time they’re 30. There is no cure for CMV, but it gets better on its own very quickly and doesn’t cause serious problems -- unless you’re pregnant. If you’re pregnant, you can pass it to your unborn child. In fact, CMV is the most commonviral infectionpassed on to babies in the U.S. -- about 1 in 150 births. About 1 in 5 babies born with congenital CMV will get sick or have long-term issues from it, including: Like CMV,herpesis a lifelong infection, but it can be inactive for periods of time. It’s also very common – more than 50% of people in the U.S. have it by the time they reach their 20s. There are two kinds ofherpes: HSV-1, which can causeblistersaround themouth, but can also be passed to the genitals. HSV-2 is anSTDthat causes genital herpes, and can causeblistersor open sores on the genitals oranus. It can also causeoral herpes. You can pass herpes to your baby in several ways: The greatest risk to your baby is if you get your first outbreak of herpes while you’re pregnant. That’s because during your first outbreak, you shed more particles of the virus and for a longer period of time. Your body has fewer antibodies to fight the virus than it will during future outbreaks. If you’re pregnant and get herpes later in your pregnancy, the chances of passing it on to your baby could be higher. Talk to your doctor about your concerns. If you have an active outbreak when it’s time to deliver your baby, it may be best for you to have a C-section, and you may need to take other precautions. SOURCES:Boston Children’s Hospital: “TORCH in Children,” “Cytomegalovirus,” “Toxoplasmosis,” “Cold Sores,” “Congenital Rubella,” “Congenital Varicella,” “Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) in Children.” National Organization for Rare Disorders: TORCH Syndrome. AIDS.gov: “Pregnancy & Childbirth.” CDC: “Parvovirus B19 and Fifth Disease,” “Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Congenital CMV Infection.” National CMV Foundation: “CMV Prevention and Healthy Pregnancy Tips.” World Health Organization: “Herpes simplex virus” American Sexual Health Association: “Herpes & Pregnancy.”  Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.