Lymphedemais swelling that’s caused by a collection of too much lymph fluid. It usually happens in your arms and legs, but it can happen in other parts of your body, as well. This swelling may causepainand limit how well the affected area moves. Lymph is aprotein-rich fluid that moves throughout your body in lymph vessels. It scoops up things like bacteria, viruses, and waste, and carries them to your lymph nodes. Your lymph nodes then filter the fluid to get the impurities out of your body. You could getlymphedemafor any number of reasons. There are treatments to help bring down the swelling so you feel and move better. If your lymphatic system is damaged or a blockage exists, the fluid can build up in the soft tissue beneath yourskin. There are two types of lymphedema: Secondary lymphedemais caused by another condition or disease that damages your lymph vessels or nodes. Secondary lymphedema may be caused by: Primary lymphedemais much less common. It’s a genetic problem that happens because your lymph nodes or vessels either aren't adequately developed or are missing altogether. The most common symptom of lymphedema is swelling in one or both arms or legs. This swelling, which can extend into the fingers or toes, usually develops gradually over time. At first, the swelling is soft and fluid. In time, it can become more dense and fibrous, and it may make your skin look grainy. You could also have pain, heaviness, or limited range of motion in the affected limb, which may make it hard toexerciseor do other activities. Over time, these symptoms may lead to other problems including infection, and in rare cases,cancer. If swelling in your arm or leg doesn’t go away, you should see your doctor. Your doctor will want to know about your medical history. You may also get imaging tests to help diagnose the problem. A lymphoscintigraphy is a scan that can detect blockages or missing lymph vessels. It is done by injecting radioactive material. Other tests to investigate the cause of your swelling includeMRI,CT scan, andultrasound. Your doctor may recommend: Photo Credit: Bob Tapper / Medical Images SOURCES: MedlinePlus. American Cancer Society. National Lymphedema Network. Vascular Disease Foundation. Mayo Clinic. National Cancer Institute. The Centers for Disease Control – Photo Caption The Mayo Clinic – Photo Caption The American Cancer Society – Photo Caption © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.