Tularemiais a rare infectious disease that can attack yourskin,lungs,eyes, andlymph nodes. Sometimes it’s called rabbit fever or deer flyfever. It’s caused by a bacteria calledFrancisella tularensis. People can become sick with tularemia, but it’s not a disease that naturally occurs in humans. It often affects rabbits and other animals including rodents, sheep, and birds. House pets like dogs and cats can get tularemia too. These are some of the ways people can get it: It’s also possible to become infected if you’re exposed to the bacteria in a laboratory setting, or potentially, in an act of bioterrorism. Tularemia can happen anywhere in the world, but it’s most common in rural areas where animals are more likely to be infected with the bacteria. It can survive in soil,water, and dead animals for weeks. That’s why it can cause infections in so many different ways. The way you become infected with the disease influences the type of symptoms you’ll have and how severe they may be. But just because you’re exposed to the bacteria doesn’t mean you’ll become sick with the disease. If you do become sick after being exposed toFrancisella tularensis, you’re likely to start having symptoms within 3 to 5 days, but it can take up to 2 weeks. There are different types of tularemia that each have their own specific symptoms. Ulceroglandular tularemiais the most common variety of the disease. Symptoms can include: Oculoglandular tularemiaaffects theeyes. Symptoms can include: Oropharyngeal tularemiaaffects themouth, throat, anddigestive system. It’s the form of the disease that’s most often caused by eating undercooked meat from a wild animal or drinking water that’s contaminated. Symptoms can include: Pneumonic tularemiacan cause symptoms that are often associated withpneumonia, including: Typhoidal tularemiais a rare, but very serious form of the disease. Symptoms can include: Tularemia is rare. There are only about 200 cases reported each year in the United States. People get it most fromtick bitesor contact with a contaminated animal. The following can also increase your risk for developing tularemia: It can be hard to diagnose tularemia because the symptoms can be similar to other diseases. Your doctor will test you to confirm the bacteria is present. They may also order a chest X-ray to check forsigns of pneumonia. Treatment usually involvesantibiotics, either injected or bymouth. If you have complications like pneumonia ormeningitis, you’ll also need treatment for these conditions. Usually people who have had tularemia become immune to it, but some people get it more than once. You can protect yourself by: SOURCES: CDC: “Tularemia.” Mayo Clinic: “Tularemia.” San Francisco Department of Public Health: “Tularemia.” © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.