Homocystinuria(HCY) is a rare condition that interferes with your body’s ability to break down aproteinfrom the food you eat. Proteinis made of smaller building blocks called amino acids. Normally, your body processes these acids into energy for everything you do. When you have HCY, your body can’t break down (metabolize) anamino acidcalled methionine. If left untreated, this acid and another called homocysteine build up in your bloodstream and can cause serious problems. A specific enzyme in your body breaks down methionine. If you have HCY, either you don’t make this enzyme or it’s not working right. A pair of genes tells your body how to make this enzyme correctly. If both don’t work, you’ll get homocystinuria. This is an inherited illness. The gene must be passed down from both of your parents. Babies born with homocystinuria look perfectly fine. Signs and symptoms start to show up within the first few years of life. HCY affects all kids differently. If your child has it, they may have many or none of these symptoms: Other symptoms may include: Babies in the United States and many other countries are screened for homocystinuria (and other conditions) shortly after birth. It’s part of abloodtest known as thenewbornscreen. The screening includes abloodtest that may show whether your child is at risk of having HCY. If results aren’t normal, they’ll need follow-up blood andurinetests to get a firm diagnosis. A metabolic doctor trained in genetic diseases will recommend a treatment plan. You need to start it right away to prevent problems. There are two types of HCY. The milder version can be treated with prescription-strengthvitamin B6supplements. Yourbaby’s doctor may perform tests to see if they will be likely to help. The vitamin helps prevent behavior problems and intellectual problems in some kids. It may lessen the risk ofeyeandboneproblems and blood clots. If vitamin B6 doesn’t work, your child will start a low-methioninediet. It usually needs to be continued for life. A dietitian with expertise in amino acid disorders can help make an eating plan from infancy and beyond. Your child probably will have to avoidhigh proteinfoods, including: Some other foods will likely need to be limited or avoided. These include: Fruits and veggies have small amounts of methionine and can be eaten in carefully controlled amounts. There are foods made especially for people with HCY too. These include flour, pasta, andbreadthat are low in methionine. Your child probably will need a specialformulato replace milk. It hasprotein(minus the methionine) and other nutrients needed for normal growth. Your doctor may decide to add a supplement too: Your child’s blood and urine will be tested regularly to make sure treatment is working. Sometimes it needs to be tweaked as your child grows and changes. If your child begins treatment as ababyand stays on it, they’ll probably grow and develop normally. Treatment also can lower the risk of strokes,heart disease, and blood clots. Visionproblems may still happen even with treatment. These can be fixed with surgery or other methods. SOURCES: March of Dimes: “Amino Acid Metabolism Disorders.” Screening, Technology and Research in Genetics Project: “Disorder name: Homocystinuria.” Baby’s First Test: “Homocystinuria.” Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.