Yourthyroidis a small gland in front of your neck that makes hormones that help control just about every organ. When your thyroid hormone levels are too high or too low, your body can't work right. That can affect your energy level, mood, and weight. If yourthyroidbecomes inflamed, you havethyroiditis. Sometimes it happens because your body makesantibodiesthat attack your thyroid by mistake. This condition is called autoimmune thyroiditis, chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis,Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, or Hashimoto’s disease. Doctors don’t fully understand why yourimmune systemmisfires this way. It could be set off by a faulty gene, a virus, or something else. Or it could be a combination of causes. You may be more likely to get autoimmune thyroiditis if you: You may not have any in the beginning. As the disease goes on, your thyroid may become enlarged, a condition called a goiter. The front of your neck will look swollen, and it might make your throat feel full. The thyroid may or may not be tender to the touch. A damaged thyroid can’t do its job, which leads tohypothyroidism-- too little of the thyroid hormones. Symptoms can include: Your doctor will orderbloodtests to check your thyroidhormonelevels. The tests also look for something called thyroperoxidase antibodies. You also might have an ultrasound so your doctor can look at your thyroid, especially if your blood test results aren’t clear. Your doctor might spot the problem through regular blood tests even if you don’t have any symptoms, especially if they’re aware that your family has a history of thyroid problems. The usual therapy is a prescription medicine calledlevothyroxine(Levo-T,Levothroid,Levoxyl,Synthroid, Tirosint,Unithroid). It’s a man-made version of what a healthy thyroid makes. Your doctor will keep an eye on you and may have to adjust your dosage every once in a while. You’ll need to take medicine for the rest of your life. Some foods, like a high-fiber diet or soy products, can mess with levothyroxine. You should also let your doctor know if you take: SOURCES: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases: “Hashimoto’s Disease.” American Thyroid Association: “Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis.” Mayo Clinic: “Diseases and Conditions – Hashimoto’s disease.” Thyroid:“Guidelines for the Treatment of Hypothyroidism: Prepared by the American Thyroid Association Task Force on Thyroid Hormone Replacement.” U.S. National Library of Medicine: “Levothyroxine,” “Cholestyramine,” “Sucralfate.” Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.