Once is funny, twice is hilarious, and anything more than that is usually just annoying. We’ve all had them, but do you actually know where they come from? They’rehiccups, and they’re the strange little sounds that can escape from yourmouthwithout warning. Hiccups start much lower in your body, though -- in the diaphragm, the dome-shaped muscle between yourlungsandstomach. Normally, the diaphragm pulls down when you inhale to let air into yourlungs, and then relaxes when you exhale so air can flow back out of your lungs to exit your nose andmouth. But if something irritates your diaphragm, it can spasm, forcing you to suddenly suck air into your throat, where it hits your voice box. That makes your vocal cords suddenly close, creating the distinct “hic!” sound. Hiccups can happen for a lot of reasons -- some of them are physical, and some emotional. That’s because the actual irritation happens in the nerve connecting thebrainto the diaphragm. Some common causes include: Hiccups are usually temporary, but in rare cases, they can stick around -- for a while. It’s usually because of damage or aggravation to the nerves connected to the diaphragm. Everything from ahairtouching your eardrum to asore throatcan affect these nerves, and in more serious cases, a tumor,goiter, or cyst in the neck can damage them. Hiccups that last a while can also be because of centralnervous systemdisorders likeencephalitisormeningitis, ormetabolic disorderslikediabetesorkidney failure. Drugs likesteroidsor some tranquilizers can trigger long-term hiccups, too. And even certain procedures, especially ones that require anesthesia, can give you hiccups. If you’ve been hiccupping for more than 2 days, or if they are severe enough to interfere with eating, breathing, sleeping or are causing you distress, you should make an appointment with your doctor. Also, talk to your doctor immediately if you have any kind ofstomach pain, fever, shortness of breath,vomiting, orcoughupbloodwith your hiccups. If you’re hoping that hanging upside down or having a friend scare you will get your hiccups to stop, we hate to disappoint you. But there’s no scientific proof that these remedies work. However, some experts think holding your breath or breathing into a paper bag might do the trick; both techniques makecarbon dioxidebuild up in your lungs, which might relax the diaphragm. If all else fails, and your hiccups continue for several days or more, your doctor may try differentmedicationsto see if they can put an end to those uncomfortable hiccups. Good luck! SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: “Why Do We Yawn, Hiccup and Get Goosebumps?” KidsHealth.org: “What Causes Hiccups?” Mayo Clinic: “Hiccups” UpToDate: “Hiccups” Get the facts on common problems. Best and worst foods. Learn what foods to avoid. Will it help constipation? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.