Every woman is different -- including their periods. Some happen like clockwork. Others are hit-or-miss and unpredictable. On average, a woman gets their period every 24 to 38 days. A period usually lasts about 2 to 8 days. Is your period irregular -- and if so, does it need treatment? You may haveirregular periodsif: Many things can causeirregular periods. Changes in your body's level of the hormonesestrogenandprogesteronecan disrupt the normal pattern of your period. That's why young girls going throughpubertyand women approachingmenopausecommonly haveirregular periods. Other common causes of irregular periods include: A less common cause is severe scarring (adhesions) of the lining of the uterus, a condition that doctors call Asherman syndrome. You probably don’t need treatment for irregular periods unless they bother you or if you need treatment for another condition that’s affecting yourmenstrual cycle. Polycystic ovary syndrome(PCOS) andhypothyroidismare two common causes of irregular periods in women. In general, the goal of treatment is to restore the balance of hormones in the body. If you have PCOS, your doctor may recommendbirth control pillsor other hormones to trigger a period. If you havehypothyroidism(underactive thyroid), you may need to takethyroidhormones. Other things that may help include: Changingbirth control.If you have irregular periods after 3 months of hormonalbirth control, your doctor may recommend another type ofbirth control. Some women develop irregular periods when usingNexplanon, Depo-Provera, or an IUD. Lifestyle changes.Some women have changes in their period because theyexercisetoo much. You may need to make your workouts less intense orexerciseless often. Ifstressis the problem, learning how to manage yourstress-- and possibly also talking with a counselor -- may be helpful. Extreme changes in yourweightcan affect your periods.Weight gaincan make it harder for your body to ovulate, soweight losscould help with that. But extreme, sudden weight loss can also lead to infrequent or irregular periods. Hormone therapy(HT).An irregular menstrual cycle is often due to a lack of or imbalance in certain hormones in the body. Doctors often prescribebirth control pills(oralcontraceptives) containing the hormonesestrogenand progesterone to help control irregular periods. Ahormonemedicationcalled progestin can also help trigger periods in women who don’t get them. If you have irregular periods and are trying toget pregnant, your doctor may prescribe other hormone treatments. Surgery.Sometimes, scarring or structural problems in the uterus (womb) or fallopian tubes may lead to irregular periods. Your doctor may recommend surgery to correct any structural problems orbirth defects, particularly if you know you want to have children. It may also be done to remove severe scar tissue in the reproductive tract. Call your doctor if you have had regular, monthly periods and the pattern changes. Your doctor may give you aphysical examand other tests to rule outpregnancyor a health problem. Call your doctor if you have any of the following symptoms: SOURCES: Womenshealth.gov: "Menstruation and the menstrual cycle fact sheet." UpToDate: "Absent or Irregular Periods." NHS.uk: "Treating Irregular Periods." Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.