Soreness, swelling, heaviness, shooting or burning pangs, tightness -- whatever the feeling, breast pain hurts. It can be troubling too -- it’s very common to wonder if what you’re feeling might be a sign ofbreast cancer. Doctors call breast pain “mastalgia.” It’s important to track the cause of it. But know that pain in either or both of yourbreastsin itself isn’t a sign ofbreast cancer. Breast tenderness and other discomfort can happen for lots of different reasons. This article examines the most common ones. Your breast pain is likely cyclical -- meaning it’s linked to your reproductive cycle -- if you have some of these signs: To help ease cyclical breast pain, your doctor might recommend you take oral contraceptives, or they may tweak the dosage you already take. They might also suggest you cut back oncaffeine, or try over-the-counter pain relievers likeacetaminophen,ibuprofen, ornaproxensodium. Most breast pain seems to relate to the levels of two hormones -- estrogen and progesterone -- in your body. Doctors aren’t sure what triggers breast pain. It can happen at different times in your reproductive life, such as during: Sore nipples can be a sign that your period is coming. That pain, along with other breast pain should ease once you have your period. Pregnancy can also cause your nipples to get tender and swell. Breastfeedingitself can cause nipple pain as your baby latches on to them. It may feel like a sharp pinch. It could also cause your nipples to crack and bleed. You can ease the soreness with things like ointments, or even rubbing a few drops of milk over your nipples to soften them before you start. This is likely linked to hormones, as well. Fibrous tissue (breast tissue that’s scar-like or ropey) and cysts (fluid-filled sacs) form in your breasts. It can be painful, but it’s normal and usually harmless. About half of women in their 20s to 50s get it. You don’t need treatment unless your symptoms are severe. These acids are found in vegetable and animals oils. If there’s an imbalance of them in your cells, your breasts can be more sensitive to hormones. To reduce your symptoms, try cutting down the fat in yourdiet. Your doctor might also recommend a diet high in complex carbs. Some doctors think takingevening primrose oilhelps correct fatty acid imbalances too. Breast pain also can be triggered by reasons other than hormones. Yours might be linked to another issue if: This pain feels like it’s coming from your breasts. But it’s actually radiating from somewhere else, often the chest wall. Usually, the pain gets better with rest, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory meds (NSAIDs), and sometimes cortisone injections. If youstrainyour pectoralis major muscle (that’s located beneath and around your breasts) it also can feel like your breasts are the source of the pain. This can result from activities like lifting, raking, and shoveling. Though mastitis usually occurs in women who are breastfeeding, it can happen at any age. If your clothes chafe against your nipples, that also can irritate them. It can let in bacteria that may lead to infection. Thrush -- a yeast infection of the breast and nipple -- can feel like a stabbing, shooting, or burning in your nipples. You might also see redness, or dry or flakyskin. Trauma to a particular area of your breast -- such as from having surgery or getting implants -- can cause breast pain. Sometimes an injury can cause a breast vein to swell and ablood clotto form. Though painful, it’s usually not serious. Certain prescription meds, as well as hormone medications, can cause breast pain. These include some heart medications and psychiatric drugs. If you have skin irritation called dermatitis, you might have arashor swelling around your nipple. The term "dermatitis" includes conditions likeeczemaandcontact dermatitis. Talk with your doctor about what might cause theseskin problemsand how you can treat them. Women with large, heavy breasts can suffer pain from stretched ligaments and breast tissue. It can hurt not only in your breasts, but in your back, neck, and shoulders, as well. Reduction surgery can help, but it, too, can cause pain if tissue is damaged during the operation. A supportive, sturdy bra can help keep your breasts in place. Wearing a sports bra to bed and when exercising can also help. SOURCES: The Royal Women's Hospital: "Breast & nipple thrush," "Breast soreness." KidsHealth: "Breastfeeding FAQs: Pain and Discomfort." NHS: "Breastfeeding and thrush." Mayo Clinic: "Dermatitis." Test your knowledge. What causes them? Learn about your options. Is it menopause or something else? © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.