Williams syndromeis a rare genetic disorder that causes a variety of symptoms and learning issues. Children with this syndrome could have problems with theirheart,bloodvessels,kidneys, and other organs. Their nose,mouth, and other facial features may be unique. They sometimes have trouble learning. Children with Williams syndrome will need to see many doctors throughout their lives. But with the right treatment, they can stay healthy and do well in school. Babies with Williams syndrome are born without certain genes. The symptoms they have depend on the genes they're missing. For example, someone born without a gene called ELN will haveheartandbloodvessel problems. The genes are usually missing in thespermor egg before they meet up to form thebaby. In a small number of cases, babies inherit the genetic deletion from a parent with the condition, but it is usually a random disorder in the genes. Williams syndrome can cause symptoms in different parts of the body, such as the face, heart, and other organs. It can also affect a child's ability to learn. Children with Williams syndrome have unique facial features that may include: Many with Williams syndrome have problems with their heart and blood vessels. Narrowed arteries don't let as much oxygen-rich blood reach the heart and body.High blood pressureand decreased blood flow can damage the heart. Babies born with Williams syndrome can be very small. They may have trouble eating, and might notgain weightor grow as quickly as other children. As adults, they are often shorter than most people. Children with Williams syndrome may be anxious, but they also tend to be very friendly and outgoing. Learning problems are common in children with Williams syndrome. They range from mild to severe. Children are slower to walk, talk, and gain new skills compared to other children their age. They may have alearning disordersuch as attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). On the otherhand, lots of children with Williams syndrome have very good memories and learn new things quickly. They tend to speak and read well, and often have musical talent. Williams syndrome is usually diagnosed before a child is 4 years old. Your doctor will do an exam and ask about your family medical history. Then the doctor will look for facial features like an upturned nose, wide forehead, and smallteeth. An electrocardiogram (EKG) orultrasoundcan check for heart problems. Abladderand kidney ultrasound can check for urinary tract conditions. Your child might get a blood test calledFISH, or fluorescence in situ hybridization, to see if any genes are missing. Most people with Williams syndrome will not have the ELN gene. Because these issues can develop over time, doctors will want to see your child regularly. Many different caregivers can be involved in taking care of your child, including a: Some of the treatments your child might need: Your child might need treatments for other symptoms, too. A genetic counselor can help you learn your family's risk for Williams syndrome. This can be helpful if you plan to have children. Williams syndrome can't be cured, but treatments can help with symptoms and learning problems. Every child with Williams syndrome is different. Some can lead a very normal life. Others have more serious health and learning problems. They may need lifelong medical care. To learn more about Williams syndrome, get help from an organization that specializes in rare disorders. SOURCES: Cleveland Clinic: "Williams Syndrome." GeneReviews: "Williams Syndrome." National Organization for Rare Disorders: "Williams Syndrome." Williams Syndrome Association: "Frequently Asked Questions About Williams Syndrome and the WSA," "What Is Williams Syndrome?" U.S. National Library of Medicine: "Williams syndrome." Remedies that could help. Treating diarrhea, fever and more. How healthy is your child’s diet? How to help your child feel better. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.