Wisdom teethare the third and final set of molars that most people get in their late teens or early twenties. Sometimes theseteethcan be a valuable asset to the mouth when healthy and properly aligned, but more often, they are misaligned and require removal. Whenwisdom teethare misaligned, they may position themselves horizontally, be angled toward or away from the second molars, or be angled inward or outward. Poor alignment of wisdom teeth can crowd or damage adjacent teeth, the jawbone, or nerves. Wisdom teeth also can be impacted -- they are enclosed within the soft tissue and/or the jawbone or only partially break through or erupt through the gum. Partial eruption of the wisdom teeth allows an opening for bacteria to enter around thetoothand cause an infection, which results in pain, swelling, jaw stiffness, and general illness. Partially erupted teeth are also more prone totoothdecay and gum disease, because their hard-to-reach location and awkward positioning makes brushing and flossing difficult. Ask your dentist about the positioning of your wisdom teeth. They may take anX-rayperiodically to evaluate for the presence and alignment of your wisdom teeth. Your dentist may also decide to send you to an oral surgeon for further evaluation. Your dentist or oral surgeon may recommend that your wisdom teeth be extracted even before problems develop. This is done to avoid a more painful or more complicated extraction that might have to be done a few years later. Removal is easier in young people, when the wisdom teeth roots are not yet fully developed and the bone is less dense. In older people, recovery and healing time tend to be longer. The relative ease at which your dentist or oral surgeon can extract your wisdom teeth depends on their position and stage of development. Your oral health care provider will be able to give you an idea of what to expect during your pre-extraction exam. A wisdom tooth that is fully erupted through the gum can be extracted as easily as any other tooth. However, a wisdom tooth that is underneath the gums and embedded in the jawbone will require an incision into the gums and then removal of the portion of bone that lies over the tooth. Often, for a tooth in this situation, the tooth will be extracted in small sections rather than removed in one piece to minimize the amount of bone that needs to be removed to get the tooth out. Before your wisdom teeth are pulled, the teeth and the surrounding tissue will be numbed with a local anesthetic -- the same type used to numb a tooth prior to having a cavity filled. In addition to the local anesthetic to numb the pain, you and your dentist or oral surgeon may decide that a sedative is desired to control any anxiety. Sedatingmedicationsthat could be selected include: nitrous oxide (otherwise known as "laughing gas"), an oral sedative (for example,Valium), or an intravenous sedative (administered via an injection into your veins). If nitrous oxide is given, you will be able to drive yourself home. If any of the other medications is selected, you will need someone to drive you both to and from the appointment. After having your wisdom teeth removed, the speed of your recovery depends on the degree of difficulty of the extraction (a simple extraction of a fully erupted tooth versus a tooth impacted into the jawbone). In general, here's what to expect. During the first 24 hours After 24 hours  Two of the more important complications after having your wisdom teeth removed include: Paresthesia.Paresthesia is a rarer complication of wisdom teeth extraction. Wisdom teeth entrapped in the jawbone are often close to nerves. Sometimes these nerves can be bruised or damaged during the tooth removal process. The result is a numbness (called a paresthesia) of thetongue, lip, or chin that can last a few days, weeks, months, or may even be permanent. Simple extraction of a wisdom tooth can cost as little as $99 per tooth. The cost of wisdom teeth that are impacted can cost between $230 and $340 and even more. Because costs vary in different areas of the country, contact your dentist or oral surgeon for their charges. Also, check with both your dental insurance carrier and medicalinsuranceprovider. One or the other type ofinsurancemay cover a portion of the cost of wisdom teeth removal. SOURCE: American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. Sores, discoloration, bumps and more. 10 secrets to a brighter smile. Before and after. Tips and home treatment. © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.