May 22, 2000 -- To protect yourself from having a heart attack, you need to reduce your risk factors and know the signs to watch for, says Nieca Goldberg, MD, a spokesperson for the AmericanHeartAssociation (AHA). Because coronaryheart diseaseis the leading killer of women in the United States, being a proactive patient may very well save your life. Thecholesterol-rich plaque that builds up on the walls of heartarteries-- and that leads to coronaryheart diseaseandheart attacks-- starts to form in early childhood and builds over a lifetime. Whenbloodcan no longer squeeze through the plaque-narrowed artery or whenhigh blood pressure causesthe artery to burst, a heart attack occurs. While you can change some risk factors forheart disease--high blood pressure, poor diet, uncontrolleddiabetes, and inactivity, for example -- there are others you can't, like genetics and age. The more risk factors you have -- if you're anoverweightsmoker withhigh blood pressure, for example -- the higher your chances of having a heart attack. Don't be shy about starting the discussion aboutheart healthwith your doctor and asking for appropriate testing and treatment. "Preventingheart diseasebefore it occurs or leads to a heart attack is the best solution," says Goldberg. Here are some prevention tips from the AHA: If your BMI is above 25, you may be at increasedrisk for heart disease, and you might want to stick to a sensible diet to bring your weight within the recommended range. If you havetrouble losing weighton your own, ask your doctor for suggestions. Even people with good health habits, though, aren't always immune. "Heart attacks often strike with little warning," says David Herrington, MD, associate professor of medicine and cardiology at Wake Forest University School of Medicine in Winston-Salem, N.C. "Knowing the signs of an attack can help you recognize the emergency and get lifesaving treatment in time." The most common signs of a heart attack, according to the AHA are: Women often experience these signs: If you have any of the above symptoms, seek medical attention immediately and assertively ask for tests used to diagnose a heart attack, says Herrington. If it isn't a heart attack after all, you've lost nothing. But if it is, the time it takes to get treatment may make the difference between life and death. Michele Bloomquist is a freelance writer based in Portland, Ore., who specializes inwomen's healthissues. Pagination Get details and learn what to expect after the procedure. What to know about pain, your emotions, and diet changes. © 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.