Yellow feveris aviral infectiontransmitted by a bite from infectedmosquitoesmost commonly found in parts of South America and Africa. When transmitted to humans, the yellow fever virus can damage theliverand other internal organs and be potentially fatal. The World Health Organization estimates there are 200,000 cases of yellow fever worldwide each year, resulting in 30,000 deaths. Yellow fever appears to be on the rise internationally, due to a decreasedimmunityto infection among local populations, deforestation, climate change, and high-density urbanization. The CDC has identified 44 countries with a risk of yellow fever transmission, many of them with tropical climates. While the actual number of yellow fever cases among U.S. and European travelers to these at-risk countries is low, vaccination is advised for most international travelers to these countries, because yellow fever has no cure and can be deadly. Yellow fever is typically spread to humans from bites by infected mosquitoes. People cannot spread yellow fever among themselves through casual contact, although the infection could possibly be transmitted directly into thebloodthrough contaminated needles. A few different species of mosquitoes transmit the yellow fever virus; some breed in urban areas, others in jungles. Mosquitoes that breed in the jungle also transmit yellow fever to monkeys, who, in addition to humans, are a host for the disease.  Yellow fever gets its name from two of its most obvious symptoms: fever and yellowing of theskin. The yellowing occurs because the disease causesliverdamage,hepatitis. For some people, yellow fever has no initial symptoms, while for others, the first symptoms appear from three to six days after exposure to the virus from amosquito bite. An infection with yellow fever typically has three phases. The first phase of symptoms can last for three to four days and then, for most people, disappears. The first phase is generally non-specific and cannot be distinguished from other viral infections. The initial symptoms of yellow fever are: The next phase isremission, which lasts for 48 hours. Patients improve. The majority recover. Unfortunately, a third, more toxic phase of infection occurs for 15% to 25% of patients. Ultimately, a condition called viral hemorrhagic fever can develop, withinternal bleeding(hemorrhaging),high fever, and damage to the liver,kidneys, and circulatory system. The World Health Organization estimates that up to 50% of people worldwide who reach this severe phase of infection die, while half recover. The third-phase symptoms of yellow fever can include:  Yellow fever is diagnosed by your symptoms, recent travel activity, and blood tests. Yellow fever symptoms can mimic symptoms of other tropical diseases such asmalariaandtyphoid, so call your doctor if you have symptoms of yellow fever and have recently traveled to a high-risk country. Because there is no cure for the viral infection itself, medical treatment of yellow fever focuses on easing symptoms such as fever,muscle pain, anddehydration. Because of the risk of internal bleeding, avoidaspirinand other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs if you suspect you have yellow fever. Hospitalization is often needed. Because there is no cure for yellow fever, prevention is critical. The yellow fevervaccineis advised for adults and children over age 9 months who are traveling to or living in countries with a known risk of yellow fever. Certain countries in Africa and Latin America with the highest risk of exposure to yellow fever now require proof of yellow fever vaccination before allowing you to travel there. Travel medicine clinics and state or local health departments usually offer thevaccine, which needs to be repeated every 10 years for people traveling to high-risk areas. These approved vaccination centers can also provide you with the International Certificate of Vaccination that you'll need to enter certain at-risk countries. Call your doctor right away if you develop a fever,flu-like symptoms, or other unusual signs after taking the vaccine. The yellow fevervaccine, in a few rare cases, has caused anallergic reaction,nervous systemreaction, and life-threatening illness. Yellow fever vaccination is not advised for everyone. The vaccine can cause serious adverse effects in certain people. Efforts are under way to develop a killed vaccine that will be safer. Talk with your doctor before getting the vaccine if you: Keep in mind that vaccination has two goals: to protect the health of individual travelers coming into high-risk regions and to protect the public health of countries by preventing the import of yellow fever into their region. If you're exempt from vaccination for medical reasons, you may need to provide proof of exemption for entry into some countries.  Vaccination is the most important measure you should take when traveling to areas where exposure to the yellow fever virus is possible. No other measure is more effective, but there are other valuable recommendations. You should:  SOURCES:CDC:  "Yellow Fever." "Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers." "Travel-Related Infectious Diseases."CDC Division of Vector Borne Infectious Diseases: "Yellow Fever" and "Updated Information Regarding Insect Repellents."Medline Plus: "Yellow Fever Vaccine."National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases: "Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases."The Journal of the American Medical Association: "JAMA Patient Page: Yellow Fever."World Health Organization: "Yellow Fever"  and "Country List: Yellow Fever Vaccination Requirements and Recommendations."Environmental Protection Agency: "New Pesticide Fact Sheet: Picaridin." © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.