If it’s your first time caring for ababyboy, you might feel a bit unsure about the right way to care for their genitals. But don’t worry -- it’s pretty straightforward. Here’s everything you need to know to keep the area clean and healthy. If your son was circumcised, that means the looseskincovering the head of theirpeniswas removed and the tip exposed. After the procedure, their care team covered their penis with petroleum jelly and wrapped it in gauze. Keep a covering on the area for the 48 hours following the procedure. For the first couple of days after the surgery, your doctor may recommend keeping the area covered with a glob of petroleum jelly on a square gauze pad. Change the pad after poopydiapersto prevent an infection. After a couple of days, once the area starts to heal, you can stop using the gauze and just put some petroleum jelly on the tip. This will keep their healing penis from sticking to their diaper. Change their diaper often, and use a mild soap andwaterto clean off anypoopthat gets on theirpenis. It’s normal for the tip of the penis to look red and appear to have a crusty white or yellow coating. That helps the area heal -- don’t wipe it off. Once the penis is healed, usually after 7-10 days, you can wash it with soap and water. Problems are rare, but let your doctor know if: Usually once the circumcision is healed, you don’t need to do anything special. Just keep the area clean and dry so your son stays healthy and comfortable. If yourbabywasn't circumcised, meaning you chose not to remove the skin at the head of their penis, you don’t have to do any special cleaning. Just wipe the area during diaper changes and rinse with warm, soapy water at bath time. The pediatrician will advise when to start gently pulling back the foreskin to clean under it. At this age, it’s fused to the head of the penis, and forcing it back cancause painor bleeding. Your doctor will let you know when the skin has separated, which won’t happen until they are 3-5 years old. At that point, the foreskin will easily move back and forth, and you can teach your son to regularly wash the area underneath. SOURCES: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: “Newborn Circumcision.” American Academy of Pediatrics: “Care for an Uncircumcised Penis,” “What Is Circumcision,” “Caring for Your Son’s Penis.” Ari Brown, MD, pediatrician, American Academy of Pediatrics spokeswoman, Austin, TX. Mayo Clinic: “Circumcision (Male).”     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.