A big decision new moms must make for their little one’s nutrition isbreastvs. formula. Some people can be uncomfortable around women while they arebreastfeeding. However, if you pull out a bottle of formula, there are those who may criticize you for notfeeding your babywhat they might consider "nature's perfect food" --breastmilk. Welcome to mommy guilt. No matter what you decide, other people will surely have an opinion. Only one thing really matters: Which choice is right for you and your baby? The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) says breast milk is the best nutrition for infants. Babies should be only breastfed for the first 6 months, according to the AAP. After the baby begins to eat other foods, the AAP encourages mothers to continue to breastfeed until at least the baby’s first birthday, or longer if the child and the parent are willing. Breastfeeding up to 2 years and beyond is beneficial for both, especially for mothers. Long-term breastfeeding may protect against diabetes, high blood pressure, and breast and ovarian cancers. Breast milk is good for your baby in many ways: Breastfeedingis good for moms, too. Women who breastfeed have a reduced risk ofbreast cancer,diabetes,heart disease,osteoporosis, andovarian cancer. It can also help you lose your baby weight more easily, and make it less likely you’ll havepostpartum depression. But let's not forget a key reason many new moms want to breastfeed. It's a wonderful bonding experience with your baby. Breast milk can also be pumped which will allow for public feedings and other family members to participate in feeding. Formula feeding is also a healthy choice for babies. If you use a formula, your baby will get the best possible alternative to breast milk. (You should not attempt to make your own formula or feed an infant cow's milk or another kind of milk.) Many moms choose formula for a variety of reasons: Your doctor may recommend that you both breastfeed and give your baby formula, or that you add powdered or liquid fortifiers to pumped breast milk. That may be needed if: While your baby is getting supplemental feedings, it’s a good idea to pump your breast milk so you can start nursing as soon as baby is ready. Once their growth has caught up, you may be able to switch them exclusively to breast milk if you choose. Whichever way you choose to feed your baby -- breast milk, formula, or a combination of both -- the most important thing is that your baby is well-fed, well-cared for, and loved. So ditch the mommy guilt! SOURCES: HealthyChildren.org: "Should I Breastfeed or Bottlefeed?" "Why Formula Instead of Cow's Milk?" ''Bottle Feeding,'' ''Where We Stand: Breastfeeding,” "Caring for a Premature Baby." KidsHealth from Nemours: "Breast or Bottle?" Womenshealth.gov: "Common breastfeeding challenges." USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center at Baylor College of Medicine: "Understanding breastfeeding supply and demand." American Academy of Pediatrics, Pediatrics, Feb. 1, 2005. LaHood, A. American Family Physician, Oct. 15, 2007. Pediatric Advisor 2013.3: "Premature Baby: Hospital Care." The Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol Committee: Breastfeeding Medicine, November 2009. Stanford School of Medicine: "ABCs of Breastfeeding."     © 2005 - 2023 WebMD LLC, anInternet Brandscompany. All rights reserved. WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.